Before Henlein 
invented the watch, time was told by clocks that used 
heavy weights. But Henlein invented a mainspring as 
the source of power to turn the wheels. At first a sti'aight 
mainspring was used, but this soon gave way to the 
coiled spring. The manufacture of watches by hand 
soon spread to England, France, Switzerland, and Italy. 
Switzerland still ranks high in watchmaking. 

Early watcheshad only anhour hand. The minute hand 
was developed in 1687. In the 1800's, new machinery 
made it possible to produce accurate watches cheaply. 
Until World War I, the large pocket watch was the 
most common type of watch for men. It often had a 
hunting case, or hinged cover, that protected the face. 

The electric watch was introduced in the United 
States by Hamilton in 1957. In the electric watch, an 
energy cell (battery) provides the power. The energy 
cell supplies electric power to a coil mounted on the 
balance wheel. As the coil passes through the magnetic 
field of two permanent magnets, an impulse from the 
balance wheel sends power to the train. The electronic 
watch was introduced by Bulova in 1961. In the elec- 
tronic watch, power from an energy cell activates a 
tiny tuning fork which transfers its power to the 

train. Arthur B. Sinkler 

See also Chronometer; Clock; Horology; Colo- 
nial Life in .America (Clocks and Watches); Switzer- 
land (picture. Watchmaking). 

WATCH ON THE RHINE is the name of a German 
patriotic song. Max Schneckenburger wrote the words 
in 1840, when it was feared that the left bank of the 
Rhine River would fall into the hands of the French. 
The German tide of the song is "Die Wacht Am 
Rhein." Kad Wilhelm composed the music in 1854. 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. See 
Jehovah's Witnesses. 

WATCHFUL WAITING. See Wilson, Woodrow 
(Crisis in Mexico). 



90 



Some Unusual Watches 





Diamonds Decorate a lady's lapel watch 
made in the U.S. between 1880 and 1900. 



An Enamel Picture of Antony and Cleopatra 
covers the back of a French watch of the 1 600's. 



A Silver Skull Watch was 

mode in France in the 1 600's. 






Chimes Strike the Hours in an English watch 
of the 1700's. The case is made of leather. 



A Shell-Shaped Case of gold enamel holds 
a small watch made in Austria in the 1 800's. 



Al-Handed German Watch, 

of aboutl 560,tellsquarter hours. 




A Book Watch made in Germany in the late 1 500's has an hour 
hand, an alarm, and a sundial. The case is elaborately carved. 



Metropolitan Museum of Art; Boston Museum of Fine Arts 

Romantic Scenes done in colorful enamels decorate the 
face and inside cover of an Austrian watch of the 1800's. 




James H. Brown 




QUALITIES OF WATER 



a liquid, water flows and pours 



As a vapor, it cannot be fell or seen 





As a solid, it is tiard and brittle 



WATER is so easy for some people to get that they 
seldom think how necessary it is for man, animal, and 
plant. But the pioneer of Daniel Boone's day had to 
hunt for a never-failing spring or brook before deciding 
upon a spot for a cabin. Bitter battles have been fought 
for the possession of some muddy water hole or tiny 
stream which would furnish this liquid. 

Next to the air we breathe, water is probably the most 
important thing in our lives. Without it, both men and 
animals would die. The bodies of living animals and 
plants contain more water than any other substance. 

One of the chief concerns of a farmer is that enough 
rain fall to nourish his thirsty plants. Factories use 
great quantities of water. Most families use thousands 
of gallons of water in a year for bathing, cooking, 
washing dishes, and watering lawns. Waterways pro- 
vide an economical way of shipping goods. In fact, life 
would be drab without the creeks, rivers, lakes, and 
oceans to break the monotony of the landscape. 

What Water Is and How It Behaves 

Bodies of water appear blue because the blue rays 
of the sunlight are reflected back to our eyes from 
the water molecules or dirt particles in the water. But 
the chemist describes water as a practically colorless 
liquid with the formula HjO. This means that each tiny 
molecule of water contains one atom of oxygen and two 
atoms of hydrogen. Hydrogen, by itself, is a \-ery light 
gas which is frequently used to inflate balloons or air- 
ships. Oxygen is another gas, which makes up about 20 
per cent of our atmosphere. All animal life needs oxy- 
gen. Without it a person would die in a few minutes. 
When hydrogen and oxygen are thoroughly mixed, they 
can be ignited, or made to burn, with a spark. They 
will unite with an explosion and form water. Probably 
the greatest mass demonstration of this chemical reac- 
tion ever seen took place on the evening of May 6, 1937, 
when the hydrogen gas of the German airship Hinden- 
burg caught fire and burned completely while this great 
dirigible was landing at Lakehurst, N.J. The chemical 
product (hydrogen plus the oxygen of the air) of this 
disaster was the common substance, water. Each pound 
of liquid water produced uses about ten cubic feet of 
oxygen gas and twenty cubic feet of hydrogen gas in 
being made. Water reacts with other substances to form 
either acids or bases. See Acid; B.ase. 

One cubic foot of water weighs a little more than 
62 pounds. The actual weight depends on the tem- 
perature. Scientists use the weight of water to define the 
gram, a unit of weight and mass in the metric system. 
The weight of water also is the standard by which 
scientists determine specific gravity of other materials. 
See Gram; Gravity, Specific. 

Heavy Water. Water contains about one part in 4,500 
of a rare substance known as "heavy water"" which is 
about 1 1 per cent heavier than ordinary water. The 
greater weight is caused by the fact that the hydrogen 
atoms in this form of water are tw ice as heavy as ordi- 
nary hydrogen atoms. Heavy water is of great scientific 
value in studies of many chemical reactions and life 
processes. It has been used in atomic research. 

Ice is simply solid water. At temperatures above 
32° F., the molecules that compose water are always in 
motion. As the temperature drops, the molecules move 
more slowly. When pure water reaches 32°F., the mol- 







an Explosion 


S 


to Produce 


•* 


One Pound 


^ 


of 





.«^ ^^ Water ^ 

When Hydrogen and Oxygen Are Mixed and ign 

o sparl&lt; ttiey explode violently. Ttie reaction produces 



ted by 
water. 



ecules almost stop moving and the water crystallizes 
(fomis a definite pattern) in the soHd state (see Mole- 
cule [Molecular Force]). Any substance, even a gas, 
becomes solid if it cools enough. But ice is an un- 
usual solid, because it is less dense than the liquid 
from which it was formed. Therefore, it will float 
on water. In other words, water expands when it 
freezes. This is most fortunate. If it were not true, 
the ice that is formed in cold weather would always 
sink. Rivers, lakes, and even a large part of the ocean 
would freeze solid in winter. There would be no fish, 
and very little other water life. 

Solid water may appear in forms other than large 
compact pieces of ice. The frost on the windowpane is 
merely a thin layer of ice crystals formed from the water 
vapor in the air. Snow, sleet, and hail are bits of ice 
frozen from the droplets of water in clouds. 

Surface Tension. Liquid water, as well as all other 
liquids, exerts a surface tension. The molecules on the 
surface cling together very tightly and try to pull the 
whole mass of liquid into as small a space as possible. 
This surface layer acts very much as the rubber envelope 
of a balloon does. It pulls water into globular form, like 
raindrops. If a steel needle is carefully placed lengthwise 
on the surface of a glass of water it will float, even though 
steel is several times denser than water. If you look care- 
fully, you \vill see the surface film bending down under 
the weight of the needle. 

Evaporation and Boiling. Because water has this 
tight layer, the surface of a tumbler of water appears to 
be inactive and quiet. Actually, it is in a highly active 
state. Untold numbers of molecules are leaving the sur- 
face of the water and going into the surrounding atmos- 
phere e\ery instant, like people rushing from a stadium 
after a football game. These escaping molecules become 
water vapor, actually water in the gaseous state. This 
process of losing molecules from the liquid is called 
evaporation. Water left standing for se\eral days in a 
tumbler in a room at ordinary temperature will com- 
pletely disappear. All the molecules will have escaped 
tlirough the liquid surface layer and will have become 
invisible molecules of gaseous water in the air." 



If this same tumbler of water were placed in bright 
sunshine on a summer day it would become quite warm 
and it might all evaporate in a few hours. This shows 
that the speed of evaporation increases markedly as the 
temperature increases. In other words, when liquid 
water is warm the molecules are exerting more pressure 
to break through the surface than when it is cold. This 
pressure is called vapor pressure. 

If a pan of water is placed on a stove it becomes hot, 
and bubbles of water vapor, now called steam, rise 
through the liquid. We say that the water is boiling. Boil- 
ing occurs when the vapor pressure of the liquid equals 
the pressure of the atmosphere above it. The water is 
then able to push the air completely away from its sur- 
face. The lower the pressure, the lower the temperature 
at which water will boil. At sea le\'el the pressure of the 
atmosphere is 14.7 pounds per square inch and water 
boils at 212° Fahrenheit. On top of a mountain 10,000 
feet high, the atmospheric pressure is only about 10 
pounds per square inch, and water boils at 194°F. For 
this reason it takes much longer to prepare a hard-boiled 
egg on a mountain than it does at sea level. 

If water is heated hotter than 21 2° F., its vapor (steam) 
exerts more pressure than that of the atmosphere at sea 
level. This fact is used in boilers, where steam is gen- 
erated under high pressure to drive the engines and tur- 
bines of modern industry'. 

The changing of water from liquid to vapor requires a 
great deal of heat. When a pound of water is evaporated 
it absorbs as much heat as it takes to raise the tempera- 
ture of five and one-half pounds of water from the freez- 
ing point to the boiling point. Hence it is possible to cool 
an object by allowing water to evaporate from it. This 
cooling eff"ect of evaporation is very important to human 
life. Warm-blooded animals, such as man, have to be 
equipped with some sort of temperature-controlling de- 
vice to keep the body at about the same temperature all 
the time. Human beings are among the few creatures 
that have the privilege of being completely water- 
cooled. Perspiration is always coming to the outer sur- 
face of the body through tiny pores. It evaporates there, 
and the heat required for this evaporation is taken from 
the body. Tliis keeps the body cool. 

Water under Pressure. Most liquids can be com- 
pressed only a little, even under high pressure. Water 
is no exception. Under a pressure of 1 75,000 pounds 
per square inch, liquid water is compressed only about 
20 per cent. But strange things begin to happen under 
such pressures. Ice will freeze in one of seven forms. 
The amount of pressure determines the form of ice. 

The Work of Water 

Water Shapes the Surface of the Earth. At one time, 
all the present solid substance of the earth was a hot 
liquid. This later cooled in the form of solid rock, such 
as granite. Water and rock have been the chief forces 
in cutting the hills, mountains, and valleys. Water and 
ice also helped make fertile soil from the original rocks. 
These processes of erosion have been going on for mil- 
lions of years, and will continue as long as there is water 
on earth. The rain dissolves or washes away small bits 
of rocks and carries them downstream to a valley or 
river bed where the water runs slowly and deposits 
its sediment. 

This process of erosion in the past has helped to form 



94 



the broad smooth fields which are fertile farm lands. But 
it is now threatening to destroy the very fields which it 
made. Every heavy rain carries away much of the fertile 
topsoil, as every muddy ri\er shows. Water erosion takes 
away some 3.000,000,000 tons of topsoil from the fields 
and pastures of America every year. This mass of rich 
topsoil would fill the cars of a freight train 475,000 miles 
long, enough to go around the earth nineteen times at 
the equator. This soil contains 40,000,000 tons of the 
essential fertilizer materials — phosphorus, potassium, 
and nitrogen. Water erosion has already destroyed about 
one fourth of our fertile croplands. Most of this waste 
could be prevented by following careful methods of 
farming and grazing. 

In winter and early spring, anyone can observe how 
ice forms in cracks in rocks and pushes off small pieces 
to help in this process of wearing down. In many high 
mountains in Europe, Asia, and the .Americas, there are 
glaciers, or rivers of ice. that never melt. All of Antarcti- 
ca, and almost all of Greenland, is covered with an 
immense glacier. Many thousands of years ago, three 
great continental glaciers spread from the Arctic Circle 
and covered more than half of North America. They 
left marks that are particularly noticeable at points 
where they stopped. The ice did not melt for thousands 
of years. Scientists believe that some of these glaciers 
were still left ten or fifteen thousand years ago and that 
they covered the area that is now the United .States. 

The Solvent Action of Water. Water dissolves many 
substances. The mi.xture that results when a substance 
dissolves is called a solution. Water does not dissolve 
everv'thing, but it dissolves so many difl'erent com- 
pounds that scientists sometimes call it the universal 
solvent. Every time water runs over the surface or trickles 
through the ground, it dissolves some of the substances 
there. Eventually, the water carries these substances to 
the oceans or an inland lake. When the sun evaporates 
water, the dissolved materials are left behind. Salt is 
one of these materials. The salt in the ocean was 
carried there from the land in a water solution. 

The ocean and many inland lakes, such as Great Salt 
Lake in Utah, have long served man as sources of com- 
mon table salt. But there are many other materials be- 
sides common salt which are found in the bodies of 
water. A factory at Wilmington, N.C., takes the chemi- 
cal bromine out of sea water to use in ethyl fluid in 
anti-knock gasolines. Factories in California, Texas, and 
England extract the metal magnesium from sea water. 
Many valuable chemicals, such as potash for fertilizers, 
are extracted from landlocked waters. 

Water has also played an important part in concen- 
tradng many of the solid mineral deposits, such as the 
great beds of iron ore in Minnesota and Michigan. Man 
would not find it easy to get at the mineral wealth of the 
world had water and ice not been working at their proc- 
esses of concentration for millions of years. 

Water in Living Cells 

Over two thirds of the human body is water. Blood 
is 90 per cent water, and even muscles contain 80 to 
90 per cent. This water is so essential for life that a loss 
of less than 20 per cent of it will result in painful and 
horrible death. A normally healthy person can live only 
seven to ten days without water. The longest recorded 
length of life on the ocean without water is eleven days. 



WATER 

To keep his water supply up to normal, the average 
man takes in about a ton of water each year, either as 
pure water which he drinks or in the food he eats. 
Every living thing must have water. For example, 
water solutions of some sort carry the food and take 
the wastes away from the living cells of even the most 
complicated living animal. The insides of plants and 
animals are largely taken up with the multitude of 
waterways which carry, in a dissolved state, the sub- 
stances essential for living. These dissolved substances 
move in or out through the walls of the living cells by 
the complicated process of omiosis, which is the diffusion 
of dissolved substances through a membrane. See 
Osmosis. 

The Natural Water Cycle 

About three fourths of the surface of the earth is cov- 
ered with water. It has been estimated that the amount 
of water on the surface of the earth is about 1,400,000,- 
000,000,000,000 tons. The bulk of this water is in the 
ocean, which is not made of pure water, but contains 
a great deal of dissolved material, chiefly common salt. 
This dissolved material in the ocean (about 3.5 per cent 
of its weight) has come from the surface of the land. For 
hundreds of millions of years, rivers have been pouring 
into the ocean, carrying in small amounts of salt and 
other materials all the time. 

Rainfall. Under the warming influence of the sun, 
about ^1,'n n of all the water on the surface of the globe 
is evaporated each year. All this disappears into the 
constantly mo\ing air as water vapor. When a mass of 



The Human Be 


&gt;dy Is a Wat 


er-Cooled 

!SPIRATI 


Machine 


WATER, CALLED PEF 


ON, IS 


CONSTANTLY LEAVING YOUR BODY 


Sometimes it 


-■-^"^' 


"j»r 


") 


cannot be seen. 






J 


Many times it 






. v-^ 


-» 


can be seen ^ 






* 


Body heat is 




4l 




also present. 


-^^ 


^ 


\ 




n 
O 

z 

—1 


The escaping 
water, visible 
or not, absorbs 
body heat and 




m 

"7 






— i 

o 

-n 


then evaporates. 


■?.,'" 
? 




'' 


The heat carried 




§ 




oFF by the woter 




"X 




vapor results in 








a lower body 








temperature. 


\ 







95 



WATER 

warm air carrying a large amount of vapor strilces a 
colder mass of air, the vapor condenses out as very tiny 
droplets of liquid water which we see as clouds, or fog. 
When conditions are just right, these tiny droplets join 
together to form raindrops which fall to the earth. Hence 
all the water has at some time or other come from the 
ocean, even though it may be a thousand miles away. 
The total amount of water on the earth never changes. 
It merely changes its form and moves from place to 
place. The average annual rainfall in the United States 
is 1 ,500 cubic miles of water, almost 7,000,000,000,000 
tons. 

Water Currents in the Ocean. England is a country 
with a very mild climate. Yet all England is much 
closer to the North Pole than any part of the United 
States. However, England and the whole western coast 
of Europe has a sort of hot-water heating system that 
comes up from the tropics. This convenient heating sys- 
tem is the Gulf Stream, a great current of warm water 
that flows in the Atlantic Ocean from near the equator, 
past the West Indies and the coast of Florida, across the 
ocean to the western coast of Europe. This ocean stream 
has been keeping that part of the northern world warm 
for many thousands of years. The history of the world 
would have been very different without this warm ocean 
stream. Northern Europe would have been so cold that 
no great civilization could have developed there. 

Large bodies of water nearly always have a moder- 
ating effect on the neighboring land areas if the land 
lies in the path of the prevailing winds. For instance, the 
climate of the land to the east of the Great Lakes in the 
United States is milder than that to the west, because 
the prevailing wind is from the west. 

Water Under the Ground. As the rain falls, some of 
the water is soaked up by the ground, and some of it 
runs off immediately. Because water always tends to mn 
downhill, it finds its way to brooks, then to larger 
streams, to rivers or lakes, and finally back to the ocean. 
Thus water is continually going round and round the 
circle of ocean, clouds, small streams, rivers, lakes, and 
oceans. It has been doing this for millions of years and 
perhaps will always continue to do so as long as the 
world we know exists. 

Of course all of the water does not run direcdy back to 
the ocean after it falls as rain. Some of it stays locked up 
under the ground for long periods of time. Some is evap- 
orated from the small streams, rivers, and lakes to be- 
come water vapor to help swell the local clouds. Plants 
take up an enormous quantity, most of which evaporates 
through the leaves. But these are side trips in the jour- 
ney, and only delay the return of water to the ocean. 

The soil acts as an enormous storage place for water. 
The underlying layers of clay or sand and the cracks in 
die rocks store up great quantities of water. All this 
will eventually go back to the ocean. It is thought that 
some of this water has been under the ground for thou- 
sands of years, and may even have come down as rain- 
fall before human history began. 

This ground water is the source of supply for the springs 
that trickle out of hillsides, and for the wells that we 
dig. Even the middle of the Sahara is not without water, 
for there are occasional oases where the layer of under- 
ground water comes to the surface in natural springs or 

96 



in man-made wells. The source of supply is the moun- 
tains, hundreds of miles away. 

In many parts of the world there are artesian wells, 
where the ground water has such high pressure that it 
flows out without being pumped (see Artesian Well). 

Purifying Water 

Absolutely pure water is a very rare substance. Since 
water easily dissolves many substances, a great many 
of these are always present in natural waters. The most 
common impurities are compounds of the chemicals 
sodium, calcium, magnesium, and iron. Fortunately 
none of these is harmful, in small quantities, to human 
beings. On the other hand, many disease germs, such 
as those of typhoid, cholera, and dysentery live in water. 
In addition, natural water often contains sediment of 
clay or sand, and vegetable coloring material or even 
tiny animals which makes it undesirable for human, or 
even industrial use. 

To remove the disease germs and the undesired sedi- 
ments, water which comes from lakes or rivers or even 
from some wells must be purified for human use. This is 
commonly done by allowing it to trickle through such 
material as beds of fine sand or charcoal. This is called 
filtering. Germs and particles of fine sediment cling to 
the sand grains and the purified water then passes 
on through. 

In many cities the water is purified by treating it with 
very small quantities of chlorine gas. Enough chlorine 
is put into the water to kill any disease germs present, 
but not enough to injure people. Sometimes both 
filtration and chlorination are used. 

Softening Water. Many parts of the country have only 
hard water. When soap is put in hard water, a solid curd 
forms. It is difficult to get a lather from the soap. This 
action is due to the presence of certain of the dissolved 
substances, usually some form of lime, in the water. 
Various means are used to counteract the effect of these 
substances. Washing powders are available as house- 



WATER NOT SUITABLE FOR MAN'S USE 

Contains compounds 

of sodium, calcium, 1 - , ^ . ,. 

,r,r,r,^^,:,,rr, nn^ irnn Comes disBose oerms 

magnesium, andiron 1 . , , 

such as typhoid, 

cholera, and dysentery 



Carries sediment of 
clay and sand 



Bed of 
fine sand 
or charcoal 



Water drips throu^ 
filtered and freed 
of Its impurities 




Contains particles of 
vegetable coloring 



Impurities cling 
•'^^ to grams of the 
filter as they s.'. 
seep through !t ■ 



WATER NOW SUITABLE FOR MAN'S USE 



SOME EXPERIMENTS WITH WATER 



A 



I 



Punch holes in a paper cup full of 
woter. The water will squirt farthest from 
the lower holes. This is because water 
pressure is greater at the bottom of the 
cup. For \W\i %ome reason, dams ore made 
thicker at the bottom to withstand the 
greater water pressure at lower levels. 





Bend a soda straw and fill it with 
water. The water will run up to fiow ouf 
of the lower end. This is because of the 
pressure of water in the higher end. 
For \W\% some reoson, water runs out 
of a faucet when the water is stored in a 
tank higher than the faucet. 



A small tube with some air in it will 
floot upside down in a jar of water. 
Put a rubber cover on the jar. If you 
press on the rubber cover, the tube 
will move toward the bottom of the jar. 
This is because the pressure forces more 
water into the tube and makes it heavier. 
For \h\% same reason, water pumped into 
the tanks of a submarine mokes it heavier 
and causes it to go down in the woter. 





Put an egg in a glass of fresh water. 
The egg will sink to the bottom. But 
if you add enough salt to the water, the 
egg will floot. This is because the salt in- 
creases the density of the water in rela- 
tion to the density of the egg. For this 
same reason, it is easier for you to float in 
solt water than in fresh water. 



&lt;^ M 




\ r 



\^ 



Place on empty bowl on top of some 
water. The bowl floats high, dis- 
placing only the weight of the bowl. 
But if you put a rock in the bowl, 
it will sink lower in the water. 
This is because the bowl now must 
displace water equal to its own 
weight plus that of the rock. 



For this same reason, on empty ship 
Boots high in the water. But a 
fully loaded ship sinks deeper 
because it must displace both its 
Own weight and that of its cargo. 



^ 




WATER 

hold softeners of water. The materials they contain part- 
ly counteract the effect of the limey materials in hard 
water. Heating water to boiling temperature sometimes 
causes part of the lime compounds to turn to solids 
which fall to the bottom of the water. This eliminates 
some of the hardness. 

Rain water contains no dissolved solid matter and so 
is soft. That is wliy rain water is caught and stored and 
is much used for washing purposes in some places where 
the water from the groimd is very hard. 

Converting Sea Water. Ordinarily, sea water is not 
fit for humans to drink because it contains a large 
amount of dissolved substances, the bulk of which is 
common salt, or sodium chloride. But modern science 
has found a way to make even sea water fit for human 
drinking. Up-to-date lifeboat equipment includes a 
"desalting kit" which consists of a plastic bag to be 
filled with sea water. A solid cheinical is dropped into 
the water. This chemical changes the soluble material 
in the water into insoluble substances which can be 
filtered out at the bottom of the bag, leaving relatively 
pure water behind. 

But this method does not make enough water cheaply 
enough to meet the great demands for more water. 
Desert regions can be irrigated and new industries 
started if economical methods are applied to convert 
salt water into fresh water. These ways are now being 
developed and used. 

Distillation is the most common way to convert 
water from salt water to fresh. In this process, a dis- 
tilling machine boils the salt water. The salt stays 
in the water, and the steam cools as relatively pure 
water. Naval and passenger ships now use the distilling, 
or evaporating, process as standard equipment. Some 
of these same machines are used in the oil fields of the 



WATER 




MPORTANT TO FOOD PLANTS 

r\ Minerals necessary to plant 

^^ growth can be taken from the 

soil only when dissolved in water. 



A growing corn plant 
uses from five to ten 
times its own weight 
In water each day. 



jT *y ^ ^ "r 




Middle East and by industries on the East and West 
coasts of the United States. Large distilling plants 
can convert from 100,000 to 3,000,000 gallons a day. 
In the late 1950"s, scientists developed the membrane 
process for converting salt water to fresh water. The 
salt water flows through narrow sheets, or membranes, 
that are electrically charged so that the sodium and 
chloride in salt are separated from the water. 

Water Power 

Water always runs downhill if it can. Anyone who 
has ever observed the destructive effects of a river in 
flood knows that this force of water can exert vast power. 
When it is harnessed, it can be turned to useful work. 

About one third of the total electrical energy in tire 
United States is supplied by water-power plants with 
electric generators. The amount of energy harnessed by 
water-power plants in the United States in 1944 was 
equal to the energy which could be produced b)' about 
250,000,000 men working continuously. That is about 
five times the number of able-bodied men in the coun- 
try. Electrical power is truly the modern slave. With the 
flip of a switch one can do more than Aladdin in fairy 
tales could do with his lamp. The prospects are that the 
amount of electricity produced by water power will be 
even greater in the future. See Water Power. 

The Thirsty Plants 

It takes 1 ,000 pounds of water on the average to pro- 
duce one pound of food, for plants are very thirsty. From 
the time a plant starts to grow until it dies it is sucking 
water out of the ground with its roots and allowing it 
to evaporate from the undersurface of the leaves. That is 
the way it feeds itself. From ten to twenty tons of water 
must pass through the corn plants to produce one bushel 
of corn. If we consider the amount of water used by the 
plants which cows eat, we are justified in saying that the 
production of one pound of beef takes fifteen or more 
tons of water. During the growing season a good corn 
crop uses up fifteen inches of water from the ground. 
On a warm summer day the movement of water through 
a large tree is rapid. As much water is being evaporated 
from its leaves as a strong man, with two buckets and 
a ladder and \sorking as hard as possible, could carry 
from the ground level up to the very top of the 
tree. 

Water in Industry and Transportation 

Nearly all industries are thirsty organizations; they 
require a great deal of water. Steel mills, where iron is 
extracted from ores and melted in furnaces, must have 
quantities of water to keep the furnace walls cool. Paper 
mills use tremendous amounts in the processes of making 
paper pulp from wood. Dye works, chemical plants, 
brass mills, textile mills, and almost all kinds of factories 
use a great deal of water for cooling purposes, for making 
steam, for washing, cleaning, or chemical processing. A 
good water supply is one of the first items to be con- 
sidered in the location of a factory. See Water Supply. 

Man's first means of easy travel for himself and his 
goods seems to have been small boats on rivers and lakes. 
Later he ventured in larger boats on to the inland seas 
and eventually on to the ocean. Modern man still uses 
these old means of transportation. 

When the early American pioneers began to settle 



98 



IMPORTANCE OF WATER TO MAN 



Without water, the earth would 
be a lifeless planet like the moon. 




( 



f 



.'A.' 



/ 



USES IN YOUR DAILY LIFE 



Your body is two-thirds woter. 






Water is the medium by which 
food is carried in the body and 
by which wastes are removed. 



Life and health depend 
on the water taken into 
the body each day. 



Cleanliness made possible 
by use of water guards 
your body from disease. 



Preparation and cooking 
of food require a plenti- 
ful supply of pure water. 



USES IN SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY 




Wafer cools the body by evap- 
oration from the sweat glands. 




Water is the alUimportant sol- 
vent in construction work and 
in manufacturing processes. 



Science and medicine rely 
heavily on chemical for- 
mulas which use water. 



Water is on effec- 
tive way of fight- 
ing most fires. 



Recreational 
Facilities 



Irrigation 



WATER PROVIDES 
THE WORLD WITH 




WATER 

the land beyond the Appalachian Mountains, the Ohio 
and the Mississippi rivers became important trade 
routes. The famous steamboat era began in the early 
iSoo's and lasted until after the Civil War. A number 
of barge canals were built in the United States to con- 
nect the great natural waterways. Important barge 
canal systems in operation today include the Lakes-to- 
Gulf Waterway, the New York State Barge Canal 
system, the Adantic Intracoastal Waterway, and the 
Gulf Intracoastal Waterway which runs from Corpus 
Christi, Tex., to Panama City, Fla. 

Some rivers, such as the Mississippi and the Ohio, are 
still used for carrying freight in boats and barges. Ocean- 
going vessels will always be used to carry freight from 
one continent to another. It seems certain that water- 
ways will always continue to serve man as highways. 

The Water Line of Civilization 

Throughout the course of history, civilizations have 
sprung up and followed the water courses. When the 
water supply failed, the civilizations went down or even 
vanished. The valleys of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers 
once supported a great civilization which largely disap- 
peared apparently because the climate changed and 
much of the land tumed to desert. The northern shore of 
Africa during Roman times supported several spots of 
civilization. These have now largely disappeared, ap- 
parently because of less rainfall. On the other hand, the 
valley of the Nile has continuously supported a great 
population since long before written history began. The 
people of this valley did not depend on rainfall, but on 
the overflowing of the river and on irrigation. The Nile 
seldom failed, for its water came from the rain and the 
snowfalls of the African mountains. 

Water is one of the most vcduable namral resources. 
To many persons, there seems to be an abundance of 
water. Yet conservation experts believe that water con- 
servation represents a national problem that is greater 
even than the depletion of other natural resources such 
as coal and iron. The chief problem is that water is un- 
evenly distributed. For example, two thirds of the 
annual rainfall in die United States covers only about 
one third of the total land area. For this reason it is easy 
to understand why only a few areas in the country have 
more than enough water. Each year about i ,000 Ameri- 
can cities must ration water. Most areas have a water 
problem of some kind. 

In modern times men have taken nature in hand to 
use natural water supplies in such a way as to meet their 
own needs. More than ever before they are using the 
waters of rivers and lakes to irrigate farm lands that 
would otherwise be too dry to raise crops. They dam the 
larger streams to deepen the channels for boats and to 
supply hydroelectric power. The Tennessee Valley in 
the United States has been greatly changed and much 
improved, largely by careful conservation and use of its 
water supply. Many large dams on the rivers of the val- 
ley supply the means of river transportation and power. 
Along with this, soil-conservation and industrial-devel- 
opment programs are being carried forward. The results 
show that by taking thought anddirectingeffortstomake 
the best use of natural water supplies it is possible to 
shape the course of human events. 



Water can be made to work for man and greatly en- 
rich his life. Or it may be neglected, misused, allowed to 
get out of control and destroy land and means of liveli- 
hood. Clifford Cook Furnas 

Related Articles in World Book include: 





Forms of Water 




Cloud 


Iceberg 




Dew 


Liquid 




Fog 


Mineral Water 


Frost 


Rain 




Geyser 


Sea Water 


Purification of 


Glacier 


Sleet 




Ground Water 


Snow 




Hail 


Spring 




Haze 


Steam 




Heavy Water 


Waterfall 




Humidity 


Waterspout 


Ice 


Whirlpool 
Waterways 




Canal 


Lake 


River 


Inland Waterway 


Ocean 

Unclassified 




Air Conditioning 


Hydraulics 


Pump 


Artesian Well 


Hydrography 


Salt 


Boiling Point 


Hydrophone 


Transportation 


Conservation 


Hydrophonics 


Water Clock 


Dam 


Hydrosphere 


Water Meter 


Erosion 


Hydrostatics 


Water Power 


Evaporation 


Hydrotherapy 


Water Softening 


Floods and Flood 


Irrigation 


Water Supply 


Control 


Osmosis 


Waterproofing 


Fluoridation 


Perspiration 


WeU 



II. 



III. 

IV. 



Outline 

What Water Is and How It Behaves 

A. Heavy Water D. Evaporation and Boiling 

B. Ice E. Water under Pressure 

C. Surface Tension 
The Work of Water 

A. Water Shapes the Surface of the Earth 

B. The Solvent Action of Water 
Water in living Cells 
The Natural Water Cycle 

A. Rainfall C. Water under the Ground 

B. Water Currents 

in the Ocean 
V. Purifying Water 

A. Softening Water B. Converting Sea Water 
VI. Water Pov»er 
VII. The Thirsty Plants 
VIM. Water in Industry and Transportation 
IX. The Water Line of Civilizalion 

Questions 

How important is water to human life? 

What do two gases form when they unite? 

What are other forms of "solid" water besides ice? 

What happens when water evaporates? Does cold or 
warm water evaporate faster? 

Why does water boil? 

Why does it take longer to boil an egg on a mountain 
than it does at sea level? 

Why is water called the universal solvent? 

How much of the human body is water? 

What is the longest time a person has been known to 
live without water? 

How much of the earth is covered with water? 

Why is absolutely pure water a rare substance? 

How is water purified for human use? 

What makes water hard? How can it be softened? 

About how much water does it take for a plant to pro- 
duce one pound of food? A bushel of com? How much 
water does it take altogether to produce a pound of beef? 



100 



WATER BALLET. See Swimming (Water Ballet). 

WATER BAROMETER. See B.^rometer. 

WATER BEECH. Sec Ironvvood. 

WATER BEETLE is the name given to many separate 
families of beetles that live in the water. Typical Vkiater 
beetles arc the w/nrligigs, the diving beetles, the crawling 
water beetles, and the ivater scavenger beetles. Some of these 
insects live in the water all their lives. Others live in 
or near the water only in the larval (young) stage. 

Whirligigs whirl on the top of the water. They have 
antennae (short feelers), long-clawed front legs, paddle- 
shaped hind legs, and compound eyes. These eyes are 
divided into two pairs, a lower pair and an upper pair. 
Diving beetles have long, threadlike antennae. Their 
hind legs are flat and fringed, and used for swimming. 
Water scavenger beetles have short, stubby antennae. 
Like the diving beetle, they eat small fish and larvae of 
insects. All water beetles are well suited to life in 
aquariums. 

Scientific Classification. Water beetles are in the order 
Coleoplerii. The crawling water beetles belong to the fam- 
ily Haliplidae; the dising beetles to Dyttscidae; and the 
whirligig to G^rinidae. The giant water scavenger is in 
the family Hydrophilidae. It is genus Hydrous, species 
H. triangularis. H. H. Ross 

See also Beetle (picture, A Giant Water Beede). 

WATER BIRD. For examples, see Bird (color pictures. 
Water Birds; Wild Ducks and Wild Geese) and also 
the lists of Water Birds and Oceanic Birds in the 
Related Articles section. 

WATER BOA. See Anaconda. 

WATER BOATMAN. See Water Bug. 

WATER BUFFALO. .Several kinds of wild oxen may be 
called water buffaloes. .Some have been domesticated, 
and are among the most useful of all farm animals. The 
water buffalo of India is one of the largest of wild cattle. 
The bulls (males) are often 5 to 6j feet tall, and their 
horns may spread 12 feet from tip to tip, measured along 
the curve. The horns sweep out and back to form almost 
a circle, and are three-sided. The Indian buffalo's hide 
is bluish black, and is easy to see through its thin hair. 
Wild Indian buffaloes graze in herds of about 50 ani- 
mals. Both wild and domesticated buffaloes have a 
keen sense of smell. 



^E*^-**^ 





Cornelia Clarke 

The Water Scavenger Beetle has swimming legs fringed 
with bristles. It is shown from above, left, and below, right. 

They like to wallow in the mud and water a large 
part of the day. They are fierce when wild, and a water 
buffalo is said to be a match for a large lion or tiger. 
The Indian buffalo has long been used in the rice fields 
of Asia, and makes rice farming possible on a large 
scale. This powerful animal can plow knee deep in mud. 
It has been imported to many other parts of the world — 
Egypt, Spain, Italy, Hungary, southern .Soviet regions, 
southern Asia, the East Indies, and the Philippines. 

Buffalo hide is tough and thick, and makes good 
leather. The milk of the cow is nourishing, with more fat 
than the milk of domestic cows. It is used in India for 
making a liquid butter. 

The carabao is a smaller water buffalo of the Philip- 
pines. It is also important in farming. A native wild buf- 
falo on Mindoro Island is called the tamarau. Africa is 
the home of two types of wild buffalo that are not actu- 
ally water buffaloes. These are the big Cape buffalo, 
which has flattened horns, and the smaller Congo buf- 
falo of central Africa. 

Scientific Classification. Water buffalo are in the sub- 
family Boviniw of the cattle family, Bovidae. The Indian 
water buflfalo is a member of the genus Bubalus, species 
B. bubalis. Donald F. Hoffmeister 

See also Buffalo; Carabao; China (picture, Chinese 
Farmers Lack Modern Tools). 



Powerful Water Buffaloes 

will work in bogs and flooded 
fields where other work ani- 
mals connot find footing. Rice 
farmers in Southeast Asia use 
them in their rice paddies be- 
cause water buffaloes enjoy 
mud and water. 




WATER BUG 

WATER BUG is the general name given to insects 
which spend all or part of their lives in the water. The 
most familiar of the water bugs are the water hontmrn, 
the bark swimmers, the giant water bugs, and the water 
striders. The large Oriental cockroach is also sometimes 
called the water bug. 

Both water boatmen and back swimmers have long, 
flattened, fringed hind legs. These legs serve as oars and 
cause the insects to move through the water. Water 
boatmen eat algae and bottom scum, and back swim- 
mers eat smaller animals which live in the water. These 
insects come to the surface for air from time to time. 
During the winter they lie inactive in the mud at the 
bottom of the water. The water boatmen lay their eggs 
and attach them to the stems of plants. Back swimmers 
often lay their eggs within the stems of plants. Back 
swimmers receive their name because of their peculiar 
habit of swimming through the water while lying on 
their backs. 

The giant bug that is often seen flying around electric 
lights in hot weather, casting its great shadows on the 
ground, is a water bug. This bug leaves its home in the 
water for short periods in the air, to look for a mate or 
for a new pool. Water striders have long spideriike legs. 
They do not swim through the water but stride about 
on the surface film. Many water bugs can cause painful 
bites. 

Scientific Classification. Water bugs belong to the cla.ss 
Iiistrtii and order HetnifUera. The water boatmen be- 
long to tiie family Corixidae, the back swimmers to the 
family Aotomrtidae, the giant water bugs to the family 
Beloslomaltdae, and the water striders to the family 
Hydrobatidae, or Gerridae. R. E. Blackwelder 

See also B..\ck .Swimmer; Bi'g. 

WATER CHINQUAPIN. See Lotus. 

WATER CLOCK, oi Clepsydra (KLEPsih drub), is an 
instrmnenl for recording time by measuring water es- 
caping from a vessel. Its invention is generally ac- 
credited to Plato about 400 b.c. People used it long be- 
fore modern clocks were invented. It consisted of a glass 
jar, with a scale of markings on its side. These were so 
arranged that, as the water ran out, the water left in the 
jar marked the time. \'arious improvements were made 



in the device, such as having a floating figure point to 
the hour. Another design caused the dripping water to 
turn a small wheel which was connected with the hands 
on the face of a dial. The water clock was used in Rome 
as early as 159 B.C. It was used in Athens to regulate the 
length of speeches in the law courts. Arthur b. Sinkler 

WATER COLOR is one of the most popular forms of 
painting. It has some drawbacks for the artist. The 
paints dry so quickly that correction or alteration is 
difficult. Most water colors have soft, pastel tones that 
do not lend themselves to rich, deep coloring. As a 
result, most artists use water colors for dry, delicate, 
sketchy effects. The paints are most suitable when the 
artist wants to put a great deal of light into his picture. 
He can do this with water colors by allowing the white 
paper to show through. 

Young children enjoy using water colors. The paints 
are inexpensive, and children using them can learn to 
handle paints and biiishes. But many art teachers rec- 
ommend Uiat children start with crayons, chalk, and 
tempera before they use water colors. 

Water color paints are made from pigments (color- 
ing matter) that are ground to a powder and mixed 
with water and gum size or some other binding material. 
The paints are usually made in the form of small cakes. 
The artist rubs a damp brush lightly over one of the 
cakes and then applies it to the paper. 

Many great artists have found water colors a chal- 
lenge to their ability. Some of the world's finest paint- 
ings are water colors. These paints were used in ancient 
times, but first gained wide popularity in the 1800's 

in England. Thomas Munro 

See also Gouache; Painting; Tempera. 

WATER CRESS. .See Cress. 

WATER CYCLE. See Water (color picture, The Water 
Cycle). 

WATER DOG is a kind of American salamander some- 
times called mud puppy (see Mud Pijppy). The term also 
applies to dogs, such as spaniels, diat are good swimmers 
and are used to retrieve waterfowl in hunting. 

WATER DUST. See Rain (How Rain Falls). 

WATER FLEA is a tiny fresh-water shellfish about yj; 
inch long. It is not an insect. Biologists call it Daph- 
nia {DAF nih uh). It skips and jumps through wa- 
ter like a flea, using its feelers as oars. These feelers 



Water Bugs Include the Water Boatman, Left, the Water Strider, Middle, and the Giant Water Bug, Right. 

Coi-nelia Clarke: Ralph Buchsbaum 




I 02 




H. Bade 

The Water Flea's Transparent Body Aids Science. 

are the antennae. The water flea has a transparent 
carapace (body covering) that surrounds most of its 
body. Because the action of the water flea's heart 
and other organs can be seen directly, the animal is 
often used in scientific experiments on the effects of 
drugs. The head of the water flea narrows into a long 
snout, which bears a pair of compound eyes. The 
animal also has five pairs of leg parts called appendages. 
These appendages move continually, and their motion 
helps the animal breathe. They also sweep in food and 
water. Water fleas are sold as food for tropical fish. In 
the stmimer. millions of these tiny creamres swarm in 
ponds and marshes. 

Scientific Classificalion. Water fleas belong to the class 
Crustacea, and to the order Cladocera. They form the genus 
Daphma. R. E. blackwelder 

WATER GAP. See Gap; Appalachian Mountalns. 

WATER GAS. See Steam. 

WATER GLASS, or Soluble Gl.ass (chemical for- 
mula Xa2.Si03), is a jeUylike compound of sodium, 
silicon, and oxygen. Its chemical name is sodium meta- 
silicate. Pure water glass is colorless, and readily dissolves 
in water. It is insoluble in alcohol and acids. 

The solution is used to preserve eggs. It makes the 
shells airtight by filling their pores. The solution is also 
used in soaps, in preserving wood, and in fireproofing 
wood, cloth, and paper. Water glass will also waterproof 
walls. Industry uses it as an adhesive in manufacturing 
fiberboard shipping cases, greaseproof boxes, and simi- 
lar containers. It is also used in cement manufacture, 
and for hardening concrete. Water glass is used in the 
purification of fats and oils, in refining petroleum, and 
in the manufacture of silica gel. George l. Bush 

WATER HEN. See G.allinltle. 

WATER HYACINTH is a plant of tropical America 
and Florida. It grows in ponds and streams, and some- 
times chokes them with its growth of floating leaves. 
The flowers are large and showy. They are colored vio- 
let, with a blue and yellow spot on the top lobe. One 
varietN' has rose-colored blossoms. The water hyacinth 
can be grown in tanks. The plants are propagated b\' 
division. 

Scientific Classification. The water hyacinth belongs to 
the pickerehveed family, Pontederiaceae. It is classified as 
genus Eichhornia, species E. crassipes. The rose-colored 
variety is E. crassipes major. theodor Just 

See also Flower (color picture, Flowers That Grow 
in Wet Places). 

WATER-LEVEL GAUGE. See Gauge. 



WATER METER 

WATER LILY, or Pond Lilv. is the popular name for 
various beautiful water plants that grow in both tem- 
perate and hot climates. The American water Illy is 
related to the hnus. These plants send their long, stout 
leaf and flower stalks up from the mud bottom of clear, 
shallow water. Their narrow to round green leaves grow 
submerged or are seen floating on the surface of the 
water. The flowers are usually raised above the water on 
long flower stalks. The white-flowered water lily is the 
most common. The flowers may be as large as a foot 
across. Some water lilies bloom during the day and 
others during the night. The water lily is the flower for 
the month of July. 

Scientific Classification. Water lilies belong to the wa- 
ter lily family, .\ymphaeaceae. The native white water lily 
of the eastern United States is classified as genus .S'ymphia, 
species N. odorata. theodor Just 

See also Flower (color picture. Flowers That Grow 
in Wet Places): Plant (picture, \"ictoria Regia). 

WATER METER is a device that measures the amount 
of water that flows tlirough a pipe. The most widely 
known type of water meter turns numbers on a counter 
that operates like die mileage recorder of an automobile 
speedometer. This type is used by water companies to 
measure the water used in homes, factories, and business 





Reading a Water Meter. Start with the circle of the highest 
denomination on which 1 or more is shown. Set down the figure 
and those on the other circles in order. The meter, /eft, indicates 
18,850 gallons and the one, righf, 1,959 cubic feet. 



Gears 




Badtrer dieter Mfg. Co. 

How a Wafer Meter Works. Water fills the meter and sur- 
rounds a chamber containing a disk and spindle. When water 
flows out of the chamber, the disk nods bock and forth, measuring 
the flow. This makes the spindle turn the gears that work the dial. 



103 



WATER MOCCASIN 

establishments. Such meters are usually installed on the 
service line, or pipe, leading froin the street to the house. 
The meter is usually in a bo.x located near the curb. 
Some companies install meters in basements, where 
the meters are better protected but harder to reach. 

The measuring chamber of a residential-type water 
meter contains a disc mounted at an angle. Incoming 
water causes the disc to rotate back and forth. The 
motion of the disc, in turn, runs the counter and 
measures the water in cubic feet or gallons. The price 
of water, or the meter rate, usually is between 10 and 
50 cents per 100 cubic feet (750 gallons). 

Other types of meters, used in filtration plants, pumi&gt; 
ing stations, and industries, continuously record the 
flow of water on a clock-operated chart. 

The venturi meter and the orifice meter restrict the 
passage through which the water moves. They are used 
to measure the water pressure to determine the amount 
of the flow. 

The magnetic flow meter uses two electrodes mounted 
flush in the walls of a pipe, outside of which have been 
mounted powerful magnets. Electric charges, or ions. 
carried in the water ]3ass through the magnetic field and 
generate voltage used by the inagnetic flow meter to 
measure the water flow. 

Electronic meters measure water flow by measuring 
changes in the wave length of the sounds made by 
moving water. A variety of other devices are used to 
measure the flow of water in open channels, such as 
irrigation canals, sewers, and rivers. John c. Geyer 

WATER MOCCASIN is a poisonous snake that lives 
in the southeastern United States. It is also called moc- 
casin snake and cottonmouth. All water moccasins live in 
the area south of a line running from Cape Charles, \'a., 
to the middle of the Alabama-Georgia boundary, then 
to southern Illinois, and from there to the point where 
the Pecos River and the Rio Grande meet in Texas. 
Poisonous water moccasins rarely appear in the region 
above this line. 

The water moccasin is a pit viper, like the rattlesnake. 
It has a hollow, or pit, in the side of its head, in front of 
the eye and below its level. Several harmless water 
snakes have a broad head like the moccasin, but they 
all lack the pit which helps to distinguish them from 
the water moccasins. 

The Deadly Wafer Moccasin is one of the few poisonous 
snakes in North America. The moccasin, also called the cotton- 
mouth, lives in southern swamps and bayous. 

Nc-w York Zoolosical Society 




The water moccasin is usually about S^ feet long, 
although the largest ones may grow to 5 feet. The body 
usually has broad dark-olive bands across it. 

This snake feeds on frogs, fishes, and other small 
backboned animals. The young snakes are born alive. 

The inoccasins like to stay in watery places, on the 
wooded banks of rivers, in large streams, and on lake 
shores. This habit makes it easier for people to avoid the 
water moccasin. The bite of the water moccasin is highly 
dangerous, and may be fatal. See Snake Bite. 

This snake is called a cottonmouth because it is sup- 
posed to have a whiter mouth than other snakes, but the 
difference in appearance is not great. 

Scientific Classification. The water moccasin belongs to 
the family Crotalidae. It is genus Ancistrodon, species 
A. piscivorus. Clifford H. Pope 

See also .Sn.\ke (color picture): \'iper. 

WATER OF CRYSTALLIZATION. See Hydrate. 

WATER OF HYDRATION. See Hydrate. 

WATER ON THE KNEE. See Kneecap. 

WATER OUZEL, 00 z'l, is a small thrushlike bird of 
western North America which dives and dips under 
water. It is also called the dipper. It lives in mountain 
regions and is an active little bird, fearlessly diving into 
iriountain streams for water insects. The water ouzel 
soiuetimes builds its nest of moss in a sheltered crack of 
rock behind waterfalls. 

The bird has slate-gray 
feathers on its back and 
lighter feathers on the 
breast. It has short wings, 
and carries its short tail up- 
ward. The feinale lays three 
to five white eggs. Relatives 
of the water ouzel live in 
Mexico, Central and South 
America, and Europe. 

Scientific Classification. e,ic H...kins 

The water ouzel belongs to Water Ouiel, or Dipper 
the family Cinclidae. It is 
classified as genus Cinclus, species C. mexicanus unicolor. 

WATER PIG. See Capybara. 

WATER PIPIT. See Pipit. 

WATER PLANT, or Aquatic Plant, is the name 
which refers to any special group of plants that live 
wholly or partly in water. The term aquatic as ordinarily 
used refers to the higher, more complex plants that 
grow in water, and does not include the algae, which 
are simpler in statcture. 

Aquatic seed plants may be rooted in the mud and 
have their leaves and blossoms above the surface of the 
water, or they may be wholly beneath the surface of the 
water. .Submerged water plants are frequently equipped 
with air bladders, or have large air pores in their stems 
and leaves. Some of the best-known water plants are 
the several varieties of seaweed; the water lily, which is 
common on lakes and ponds; water cress, which spreads 
so rapidly that it sometiines blocks the channels of 
streains; and the cattail, or bulrush. William c. beaver 

Related Articles in World Book include: 



y 



Bladdcrwort 
Bulrush 
Cattail 
C:rcss 


Duckweed 
Lotus 
Papyrus 
Pondweed 


Rush 
Seaweed 
Water Hyacinth 
W?ter Lily 


Diatom 







104 



Water Polo combines parts 
of basketball and hockey. The 
players try to get the ball into 
the opposing goal to score. 



WATER POLO is an in- 
ternational water sport tliat 
requires endurance, quiclv 
thinking, and team play. 
Many sports leaders con- 
sider it the roughest of all 
contests, although some of 
its rougher elements have 
been sacrificed for more sci- 
entific play. 

The objective in water 
polo is to throw or place 
the ball through the op- 
posing team's goal. Seven 
players make up a team — 
thi-ee forwards, three backs, 

and a goalkeeper. The goals measure 10 feet between 
goal posts by 1 foot deep, and are enclosed at the sides 
and the rear by a net. A crossbar connects the goal posts 
about 3 feet above the water. The players use a leather 
or rubber ball the size of a fully inflated soccer ball. 
They play in deep water on a course that can range 
from 20 by 60 feet to 60 by 90 feet. The ball is dropped 
into the water to start play, and players mo\e the ball 
by balancing it on one hand, passing, or dribbling (keep- 
ing the ball in front of the head and between the arms). 
The ball must be handled by two or more players before 
a legal goal can be made. Each game lasts 20 minutes. 

Water polo combines features of basketball and 
hockey. The players must be exceptionally strong swim- 
mers, and the goalkeeper must be able to anticipate 
attacks on the goal and surge high out of the water to 
block shots. 

The sport began in England in the 1870's, and was 
brought (o the swimming pools of the United .States in 
the 1880's. At that time, water polo was a rough sport, 
and players occasionally strangled opponents and tried 
to drown them. Water polo teams from Hungary have 
been the most consistent winners in international com- 
petition in the last 30 years. Water polo is played in the 
Olympic Games. Sam j. Greller 

WATER POWER. Water provides a valuable source of 
power because it is dependable, safe, controllable, and 
cheap. After man uses up coal or gasoline, he cannot re- 
place them. But the water he uses as a source of energy 
does not become completely used up. The constant 
cycle of nature provides man with a constant supply of 
water for power. The heat of the sun evaporates ocean 
water. The water forms in clouds and falls as rain or 
snow. It then runs from the higher levels of ground 
to the sea, where it again evaporates. This natural cycle 
goes on day after day, year after year (see Water 
[color picture]). 

Water power comes from various devices that man 
has built in order to permit him to use the energy found 
in water as it moves from higher to lower places on the 
surface of the earth. In using water power, man is har- 
nessing the effects of gravity upon the water. The energy 




Phil stclnccki 



in water power comes both from the weight of the water 
and from the head upon it. The head of the water is 
measured by the vertical distance through which the 
water falls in performing work. The pull of gravity gives 
a weight of 62.4 pounds to every cubic foot of water. 
Therefore, a column of water one foot square at the 
base and 30 feet high would exert a weight of 1,872 
pounds. When this weight strikes a machine's wheel, it 
turns it, thus producing useful energy. 

Measuring Water Power. Water power is usually 
measured by the horsepower unit. One horsepower is a 
force that will raise 33,000 pounds one foot in one min- 
ute, or 550 pounds one foot in one second. To estimate 
the horsepower of a waterfall, multiply the flow in cubic 
feet per second by the height of the fall in feet. Then 
multiply this product by .1 13 — which is equal to 62.4, 
the weight of a cubic foot of water, divided by 550. Ac- 
cording to this rule, the power that exists in a waterfall 
50 feet high with a flow of 500 cubic feet per second 
would be 50 X 500 X .113, or 2,825 horsepower. 

Water as a Source of Power. The first devices to 
produce water power were fairly simple machines. Man 
built a platform by the side of a stream and attached a 
wheel with blades. When the water touched the blades, 
the wheel turned. The power from the wheel could be 
used to run simple machinery. At first, this power 
lifted water from a river, or ground wheat between 
heavy stones tliat were turned by the wheel. 

Man soon learned to improve his ways of using water 
power. He built dams that caught the floodwaters and 
stored them. Then the water could be let out only when 
needed. In this way, a stream could furnish water even 
during dr&gt;' seasons. Dams also raised the water to a 
higher level in order to increase the head of the water 
and deliver more power. See Dam, with its list of Re- 
lated Articles; Irrigation. 

Water power as a source of electric power began with 
the development of the water turbine in 1832. This 
permitted much greater efficiency in the use of water 
power. One of the first electric generators powered by 
water was put to use in .\ppleton. Wis., in 1882. Gen- 
erators now produce electric power to run our machinery, 

105 



t 



^^ 





A Water Skier practices on shore, above, before testing his 
skill in the water. Sl&lt;imming over the water, a skier holds on 
to a tow line extending from a speeding motorboat, right. 



cypress Gardens, Florida 



to light our homes and streets, and to perform a thou- 
sand other tasks. See Electric Power; Turbine. 

World Water-Power Production. The potential water 
power of the entire world has been estimated at about 
660,U00,{J()0 horsepower, or about four times the power 
from every other source. But only about 1 3 per cent of 
the total water power has been developed. 

The continent of Africa has a heavy annual rainfall 
and a high interior plateau that drops abruptly to the 
sea. These conditions give Africa more potential water 
power than any other continent. The Congo River basin 
alone has one fourth of the world's possible water power. 
At .Stanley Falls, 15,000,000 horsepower could be de- 
veloped. But Africa has done litde to develop its water 
power. Asia ranks second among the continents in po- 
tential water power, but irregular rainfall limits constant 
production of power. 

In contrast to Africa and Asia, North America has 
about 13 per cent of the world's potential water power. 
But it has developed over 40 per cent of all the water 
power used. The United States alone has over 27 per 
cent of the world's used water power. hope hoi.way 

Related Articles. See the sections on Electric Power in 
various state articles, such as Arizona (Electric Power). 
See also the following articles: 

Conservation Electric Power Reservoir 

Dam Irrigation Turbine 

WATER PRESSURE. See Hydraulics. 

WATER PURIFICATrON. .See Water Supply. 

WATER SKIING is a popular outdoor sport in which 
persons skim swiflly over the surface of the water on 
skis. It resembles snow skiing, because water skiers 
wear similar, though wider, skis of varying lengths. The 
water skier holds on to a towrope attached to a motor- 
boat and is pulled across the surface of the water in this 
way. Outboard boats of 25 horsepower and over, and in- 
board boats of 50 horsepower or more, are the kinds 
most often used for water skiing. The towrope is usually 

io6 



about 75 feet long and may be made of manila hemp, 
cotton, or other material. Water skiing equipment can 
be rented at most waterside resorts. The American 
Water Ski Association and other groups offer booklets 
for the beginner and the advanced skier. Guy w. Hughes 

WATER SOFTENING is a method of removing from 
water the minerals that make it hard. Hard water does 
not dissolve soap readily. It forms scale in pipes, 
boilers, and other equipment in which it is used. The 
principal methods of softening water are the lime-soda 
process and the ion-exchange process. 

In the lime-soda process, soda ash and lime are added 
to the water in amounts determined by chemical tests. 
These chemicals combine with the calcium and mag- 
nesium in the water to make insoluble compounds that 
settle to the bottom of the water tank. 

In the ion-exchange process, the water filters through 
minerals called zeolites (see Zeolite). As the water 
passes through the filter, the sodium ions in the zeolite 
are exchanged for the calcium and magnesium ions 
in the water, and the water is softened. After household 
softeners become exhausted, a strong solution q{ sodium 
chloride (salt) is passed through the filter to replace the 
sodium that has been lost. The use of two exchange 
materials makes it possible to remove both metal and 
acid ions from water. This method has been used to 
convert salt water to fresh water. c. Fred ournham 

WATER SPORTS include all sports that are played 
under, on, or above the water. Some are traditional, like 
swimming, fishing, diving, and boating. Others were 
developed in the 1800's and 1900's. 

Among more recent water sports are aquaplaning, 
skin diving, spearfishing, surfing, water polo, and water 
skiing. The Olympic Games program includes swim- 
ming, diving, and other water sports (see Olympic 
Games). All water sports mentioned here have separate 
articles in World Book. SamJ.Greller 

WATER STRIDER. See Water Bug. 



WATER SUPPLY. Our earth has life because it has 
water. Wherever there is water, even in small amounts, 
life is usually found. But where water supply is limited, 
there is little life. Few places on earth have less life than 
the desert sands and the polar icecaps. 

People need only a small amount of water to live, 
because they drink only a few quarts each day. This 
amount would be more than enough if man used water 
onlv for drinking purposes. But civilized man has many 
uses for water besides drinking it. He uses it to bathe 
himself, to cook his food, and to wash his dishes and 
clothing. Water irrigates his crops and thereby increases 
his food supply. Modern factories run on water. It takes 
270 tons of water to make a ton of steel. 1,400 tons of 
water to make a ton of rayon, and 4,700 tons of water 
to make a ton of synthetic rubber. For cveiy gallon of 
water used for cooking and drinking, 25 to 50 gallons 
are used to wash and flush away dirt and human waste. 
Without good water supplies, it would be impossible 
for a modern city to meet all these human needs. Ameri- 
can water systems produce enough water each day to 
supply every person with about 1 50 gallons. 

It is not surprising that cities have grown up near 
large water supplies furnished by rivers and lakes. Na- 
tions without adequate water supplies arc never pros- 
perous. Early civilization flourished in Mesopotamia 
near the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. These same civili- 
zations disappeared when water reservoirs and canals 
filled with silt and when the irrigation systems failed. 

Sources of a Water Supply 

Natural sources supply the cheapest water available. 
In areas that have no other source of water, people get 
water from wells. If the underground water is unsuit- 
able, rain water from roofs can be collected and stored 
in cisterns (storage tanks for water). Gro\\ing commu- 
nities and indusuies soon use more water than wells can 
provide. \Vhen this happens, they use the water sup- 
plied by streams and lakes. Along seacoasts or on islands 
where there is no supply of fresh water, people often 
make fresh water from sea water. 

Rain Wafer supplied most individual needs during 
the early growth of the United .States. There were no 
public water-supply systems, and wells had to be dug by 
hand. The rain water drained from the roof into a cis- 
tern that was usually built under the back porch or 
kitchen. The water was then pumped from the cistern 
into an old-fashioned sink. Today, only a few localities 
depend on rain water for their water supplies. 

Rain water is sojt. This means that it contains no 
dissolved mineral salts from the ground. But it does 
contain dust from the air and from the surfaces that it 
touches. Dust particles can be removed by filtering rain 
water through sand. 

Underground Water exists even.-where beneath the 
surface of the ground. It may be near the surface or 
down ver)' deep. It may be salty or fresh, soft or hard. 
The carbon dioxide in some tmderground water corrodes 
metal pipes. Underground water seldom contains bac- 
teria because it has been filtered through the soil. 

Ground Water is rain water that has soaked into the 
ground and slowly filtered downward. It eventually 
comes to a zone where the soil and the rocks are satu- 
rated with water. The top of this saturated zone is called 
the water table. .See Ground Water. 



W' 







fta^.; 



Chioap.t nridgo &amp; Iron Co. 

A 77-Foot-High Watersphere stores water for the village 
of Colomo, Wis. It has a 40,000-gollon water capacity. 

Wells that reach the water table yield large quantities 
of water, provided the pores in the soil are large enough 
to let the water pass through. In indusuial and irrigated 
areas, the water is almost always taken from the ground 
faster than it can filter down from the surface. This 
depletes ground-water storage, and lowers the level of 
the water table. The water level may fall so deep that 
pumping out water becomes expensive. See Well. 

Floodwaters are sometimes spread in large beisins to 
increase the supply of ground water. The basins hold 
the floodwater within a large area. They let the flood- 
water filter slowly into the ground, instead of flowing 
away rapidly (see Basin). 

Surface Water supplies most of the water for large 
cities and industries. These supplies consist of large lakes 
and ri\ers, or smaller rivers on which dams have been 
built to store floodwaters for future use (see Dam [What 
Does a Dam Do?|). Chicago, Milwaukee, Cleveland, 
and other cities get their water from the Great Lakes. 
St. Louis and New Orleans use water from the Missis- 
sippi River. New York Cit\-, Boston, and Baltimore 
hav'e large storage reservoirs on upland streams. 

Cities that depend on lake-water supplies build tun- 
nels or pipelines and connect tlicm to an oflshore water 
intake, where the water is relatively pure. Intakes are 
usually towers equipped with screens to keep out debris. 
They also have gates that contiol the depth at which 
the water is withdrawn. The pumps and purification 
plants are located on shore. 

Cities remove river water in much the same v\'ay as 
they remove lake water. They construct the intake up- 
stream from the city to avoid taking in impurities from 
water the cir&gt;^ has already used. But the same river water 
mav be used by several cities before it finally passes into 
the ocean. For this reason, river water is often less 
sanitan' than lake water. 



107 



HOW CITY WATER IS PURIFIED 





LIME 



ALUM 

ACTIVATED CARBON 

CHLORINE 



City wafer is often purified by the Filtration method. First, if is 
pumped to the chemical building where lime, activated carbon, alum, 
and chlorine are added. From there, it passes to the coagvlation 
basin where the chemicals are thoroughly mixed with the water. 
The chemical reaction causes most impurities to coagulate, the 
solid particles settling to the bottom as the water passes through 
the sedimentation basin. To do away with bad tastes or odors which 
remain, activated carbon is added before the water passes through 
a bed of floe (gelatin mat), sand, and gravel in the filter basin. As 
the water leaves the filtered water reservoir, chlorine and aluminum 
sulfate are added to complete the purifying process before it is 
pumped into the distributing main for daily use in homes and factories. 




TUNNEL TO OTHER PUMPING STATIONS 



Sea Water. Most of the water on earth is the salty 
water of the oceans. The supph- of usable water would 
be almost limitless if the salt could be removed easily 
from sea water. On seacoasts or islands that have no 
fresh water, it is sometimes cheaper to remove the salt 
from the sea water than to bring in fresh water by ship. 
But it is not cheap to remo\-e salt from sea water. The 
process is complicated and requires much expensi\c 
equipment (see Water [Converting Sea Water]). 

Stored Water. Streams sometimes have to be regu- 
lated in order to have a sufficient supply of water when 
and where it is needed. Man&gt;- communities store flood- 
water behind dams and release it during the summer to 
keep the streams from getting too low. The regulation 
of stieams may not supply enough water to meet the 
needs of cities and factories. In such cases, pipelines and 
tunnels must be built to bring additional water from 
other rivers (see Aqueduct). 

Cities often build reserx'oirs in tlie hills and moun- 
tains some distance from the city, where land is cheaper 
and the water purer. Reservoir water resembles lake 
water and is much purer than river water. Because of 
the high elevation, water can often be brought to the 
cit\' without pumping it. Pipelines, tunnels, and canals 
cariT the water from the reservoir to the city. The dams 
that form the reservoir usually have built-in intakes. 
See Reservoir. 

How Water Is Purified 

As commonly used, the term pure water means that 
the water is satisfactor&gt;- for the use that it serves. Thus, 
pure water for industry may not be pure water for 
drinking. Drinking water must be clear, cool, and free 
of any special taste or odor. It should contain some, but 
not much, mineral salt. It should also be free of all 
harmful bacteria and chemicals. But industrial water 
may also have to meet more rigid specifications. For 
example, water used in high-pressure steam boilers must 
be completely free of dissolved oxygen, and it should 
contain only a small amount of dissolved salts. The 
parts in some pieces of electronic equipment must be 
washed with water that is almost entirely free of dis- 
solved substances. This water must be distilled several 
times before it is pure enough to be used (see Distilla- 
tion). 

Most cities use three basic processes to purify water: 
(1) coagulation and sedimentation, (2) filtration, and 
(3) disinfection. 

Coagulation and Sedimentation. A coagulant is a 
chemical that forms a small, fluffy mass called floe in 
natural water. Floe particles are about the size of snow- 
flakes, and they help remove the suspended sediment 
from water. They gather the suspended matter in water 
and carry it to the bottom of large sedimentation tanks. 
-Aluminum sulfate, also called fl/ter alum, is the most 
common coagulant. 

\ feeding machine continually measures out the 
amount of alum needed. A stream of water carries the 
alum to the point at which raw (natural) water enters 
the purification plant. After about 30 minutes, the 
coagulant has been thoroughly mi.xed into the incoming 
water and the floe has formed. The coagulated water 
then passes slowly through sedimentation plants where 
the floe settles to the bottom along with the suspended 
particles. Large scraping machines periodically remove 



WATER SUPPLY 

the mud or sludge that forms on the bottom of the sedi- 
mentation tank. In some places, the sedimentation tank 
is emptied about twice a year. 

The process of coagulation and sedimentation re- 
moves most of the bacteria and suspended matter from 
water. But to produce a completely clear water and to 
remo\-e all bacteria, the water must pass from the sedi- 
mentation tanks to filters. 

Filtration. \Vater filters consist of fine sand placed in 
concrete or steel tanks. The sand forms a bed about 30 
inches thick. The water filters down through the sand 
to an underdrainage system that collects the water and 
carries it to a clear water-storage basin. Eveiy minute 
2 or 3 gallons pass through each square foot of the bed. 

The first few inches of die sand bed trap the floe and 
bacteria that remain in the water after coagulation and 
sedimentation. The filter must be \vashed every day or 
so because the floe clogs the sand bed. Washing is done 
by forcing clean water up through the sand. \Vater 
gutters above the sand bed collect the dirty water and 
carry it off to a drain. 

Disinfection is designed to keep water from carrying 
infectious diseases. Disinfection can be accomplished 
in a number of ways. Heating is the most reliable method, 
but it is not practical for large quantities of drinking 
water. Most water departments use chlorine because it is 
cheap and acts rapidly (see Chlorine). Chemists find 
it easy to detect and measure the amoimt of chlorine in 
any given water supply. A very small amount of chlorine 
quickly disinfects large quantities of water. One pound 
of chlorine can disinfect 200.000 gallons of water. This 
is more water than one person could drink in a thousand 
years. Chlorine may be added to the water either before 
coagulation and sedimentation or after the water has 
been filtered. 

Water may also be disinfected by processes using silver, 
iodine, ozone, and ultraviolet light. But these processes 
are not as cheap as chlorination. They also tend to be 
less safe and must be carefully controlled. 

Softening water can be done in a number of ways, 
but the purpose of every method is to make soap easier 
to use, to protect metal that comes in contact with the 
water, and to make water generally more suitable for 
home and industrial use. City water plants usually 
soften water with lime or lime and soda. Water can also 
be softened by a process of ion exchange (see Ioniza- 
tion). A filter bed of zeolite, a claylike material, gives 
up its sodium in exchange for the calcium in water (see 
Zeolite). This softens the water that passes through 
the zeolite bed. 

Other Methods of Purification are used to remove 
undesirable tastes, odors, and minerals from water, or to 
give the water a special quality. After the water has 
passed through the filters, lime is sometimes added to 
keep the water from rusting pipes and the various me- 
tallic parts of household plumbing systems. Odors can 
be removed from water b\' aeration (forcing the water 
into air in a fine spray). Many dues fluoridate drinking 
water to help reduce tooth decay (see Fluorid.^tion). 

Distributing Water 

After the water has been purified, it must be dis- 
tributed to homes, businesses, and industries. Water 

io8a 



A WORLD BOOK SCIENCE PROJECT MAKING PURE WATER 

The purpose of this project is to learn how water from lakes and other sources 
is treated to make it pure enough to drink. You can get the materials you need 
to build a model purification plant from a hardware store and lumber yard. 



PURIFICATION 
PLANT 

^CHEMICAL BUILDING 




Most large cities use purification plants similar to the model, 
above, to make water from lakes and other sources pure enough 
to drink. The water first flows into cribs, which strain out large 
particles of sand and other impurities. Pipes carry the water to 
a mixing basin where it is thoroughly mixed with chemicals. The 



chemicals cause fine impurities to clump together and settle to 
the bottom of the sed/mentof/on basin. Finally, the water flows 
slowly through filters mode mostly of thick layers of sand and 
gravel, and collects in a reservoir. To complete the purification, 
chlorine is added as the water moves from the reservoir to homes. 



MATERIALS 




Clear Plastic Tubing and Adhesive Tape 



Tin Plate, Plastic, 
Cork, Screw, and Nuts 



Small Electric Water Pump 



Lumber needed to make the display board, shelves, and stand is shown, below. You will also 
need several different colors of paints to represent the chemicals added to the water. 



1 in. X 6 in. lumber 
(stielves) 




24 in. X 36 in, plywood (display board) l\^ 



2^ 




4 bolts and nuts 



Paint 



1 in. X 2 in. tomber 
(stand) 




Illustrated by Kaymond Feilman for WORLD BOOK 



ASSEMBLY 



The Lake and Crib. Drill a hole near one corner of the rectangu- 
lar pan as shown, be/ow. Push the funnel spout through the hole 
and solder it in place. Solder the strainer basket to the top of 
(he funnel. Put mounds of sand at the other end of the pan. 



Tea strainer basket 
Funnel 



The Mixer. Cut and fold a tin plate as shown, be/ow. Drill a 
hole above the fold. Put plastic fins in slits in a cork. Use a 
screw as an axle. Push it through holes tn the cork and tin plate. 
A nut on each side of the tin piate holds the axle in place. 



Fine sand 




The Filter is a plastic container with layers of ingredients 
that filter impurities out of the water. Make a hole in the 
bottom of the container and insert a plastic tubing drain. 
Then put in layers of cotton, pebbles, coarse sand, fine 
sand, and charcoal paste. 



The Filtered Water Reservoir 

in a real plant holds water ready 
to be piped out to users. But in 
the model, it sends water back to 
the starting basin for use again. 



The Display Board and Stand 

are assembled as shown, obove. 
Draw a plan on the board showing 
where each piece goes. Point the 
chemical building and consumer sec- 
tion. Install braces for the shelves. 
Put the containers in place and string 
the plastic tubing from one to an- 
other. Use adhesive tape to hold 
the tubing in place on the board. 



109 




The Reservoir and Tanks 

at West Seattle, Wash., can 
store 8,500,000 gallons of 
water. The water is delivered 
to the city through pipelines 
and tunnels. 



II Water Works 



distribution is the most expensive part of a water-supply 
system, because it requires a vast network of pipes. 

Distribution systems consist of four parts: (1) pumping 
stations, (2) street mains, (3) reservoirs or tanks, and 
(4) the plumbing and pipes in buildings. 

Pumping stations lift the water to various heights and 
maintain enough pressure to force the water through 
the system to the fixtures or hydrants where it is used. 
Water mains run beneath the streets and connect at 
each intersection. They form a network of pipes that 
carries the water to every consumer and every fire 
hydrant. 

At various times a city will use an excess of water, 
because of a large fire or some other drain on the water 
supply. In such cases, the pumping stations cannot 
pump enough water. For this reason, a city must have 
storage tanks to supply the additional amount of water. 
The tanks help keep a uniform water pressure through- 
out the city. During the day, the water level in the tanks 
falls, but the tanks are refilled at night when the city 
uses less water. 

A pipe called the service connection connects the street 
main to the piping system in homes and buildings. The 
water company installs a water meter on the service 
connection, usually near the sidewalk or curb (see 
Water Meter). The water company owns all parts of 
the water-suppl)- system up to and including the water 
meter. The property owner must install all other pipes. 

Conserving the Water Supply 

Water is no longer free for the taking. The day is 
almost gone when cities and industries can get water 
from a nearby stream at the mere cost of pumping it 
out. Water now has to be stored, transported, purified, 
and distributed like any other product. Marketing of 
this kind takes money. 

Many communities claim that they have a water 
shortage. Actually, there is plenty of water available, 
but it is neither cheap nor free. For example, the 
Susquehanna River could easily supply all the water 
needed by 100,000,000 people, even if none of the water 
returned to the river for re-use. Some sections of the 
United States, however, do have a genuine water 
shortage. This is especially true of the Great American 
Desert, which covers most of the western United States. 
In these states, the limited amount of water greatly limits 
the number of people and industries in any one region. 

For more than 50 years, the Department of the Inte- 
rior has been constructing great storage and transporta- 
tion systems to conserve the water supplies of the United 
States. But large quantities of water still flowdown to 



the sea without being used. See Conserv.\tion (Water 
Conservation). 

History 

About 2000 B.C., persons in India filtered water 
through charcoal, kept it in copper containers, and 
exposed it to sunlight. In ancient times, people around 
the Mediterranean Sea knew how to dig wells and to 
collect water in cisterns. They also knew how to treat 
the water to make it taste better, as well as to make it 
safer to drink. Rome was the first city to have a fairly 
complete water-supply system. It depended on nine 
aquaducts that were from 10 to 50 miles long. 

In 1829, the Chelsea Water Company built the first 
water filters for the city of London. In 1871, Pough- 
keepsie, N.Y., became the first large United States city 
to use filters in processing its water supply. But most 
cities still did not disinfect their water. About half the 
population still had typhoid fever at some time in their 
lives. After 1900, it became an accepted practice to 
disinfect water. During the next 25 years, typhoid 
fever disappeared almost completely from the United 

States. John C. Geyer 

Related Articles in World Book include: 



Aqueduct Hydraulics 


Sewage 


Artesian Well Irrigation 


Standpipe 


Chlorire Plumbing 


Water 


Dam Pump 


Water Meter 


Filter Reservoir 


Water Softening 


Fluoridation Sea Water, 


Well 


Ground Water Purification 


of 


Outline 




1. ScMrces of a Water Supply 




A. Rain Water 


D. Surface Water 


B. Underground Water 


E. Sea Water 


C. Ground Water 


F. Stored Water 


II. How Water Is Purified 




A. Coagulation and 


D. Softening 


Sedimentation 


E. Other Methods 


B. Filtration 


of Purification 


C. Disinfection 




III. Distributing Water 




IV. Conserving tlie Water Supply 





V. History 



Questions 



Why do we need water supplies? 

What is a cistern? .\ basin? 

How do cities conserve and store water? 

What is a water tabic? 

What is soft water? 

What do we mean by fnire drinking water? 

How is chlorine used to help purify water? 

What is filtration? 

What is the function o(floc in purifying water? 



IIO 



WATER TABLE. See Drainage; Ground Water. 

WATER TOWER. See Standpipe. 

WATER TURBINE. See Turbine (Water Turbines). 

WATER TURKEY. See Darter (bird). 

WATER-VASCULAR SYSTEM. See Echinoderm. 

WATER WHEEL changes tlie energy of falling water 
into mechanical energy- which can be used for running 
machinery. The best source of water power in nature is 
found in waterfalls and rapids in rivers. The water is 
directed into the wheel through a chute. The wheel is 
mounted on an axle, which is connected by belts or 
gearing with the machinery it is to operate. The wheel 
has manv curved blades. The force with which the 
water strikes the blades causes the wheel to rotate, 
\\ hich makes the shaft turn. This rotates the shaft of the 
machinery being dri\en. 

There are two main types of water wheels, the verti- 
cal and the horizontal. The vertical wheels include the 
two most familiar types, the overshot and the undershot. 
The amount of work which an overshot water wheel can 
do is controlled by the weight and distance of the water 
that falls on the wheel. 

The overshot water wheel has many buckets around 
its edge. The weight of the water falling into these buck- 
ets causes the wheel to turn. The efficiency of this type 
of water wheel sometimes reaches 80 per cent. 

The undershot water wheel is built so the water 
strikes against the buckets of the wheel at the bottom. 
This type of wheel has such a low efficiency that it is 
rarely used. 

Historians believe that the first water wheel was 
developed in the lOO's B.C. At that time it was used 
mainly to grind com. Later it was used for many kinds 
of mechanical operations. The water wheel was a major 
source of power until the invention of the steam engine 

in the 1700"s. Robert F. Paton 

See also Hydraulics; Turbine (Water Turbines); 
Water Power. 




This Old Overshot Water Wheel in West Virginia is still 
in use more than 1 50 years after it was first put into service. 



WATERFALL 

WATER WITCH. See Grebe. 

WATER WONDERLAND. See Michigan. 

WATERBUCK. Sec .Anielope (Kinds). 

WATERBURY, Conn. (pop. 107,130; met. area 185,- 
548; alt. 260 ft.), is known as the Brass Center of the 
World. It lies on the Naugatuck River, 25 miles north 
of Long Island Sound (see Connecticut [color map]). 

Waterbury ranks first among the cities of die L'nited 
States in the manufacture of brass and copper goods, 
brass casting, sheet and rolled brass, and other brass- 
ware products. Waterbury mills make the "blanks" for 
L'nited States nickels and the coins for many South 
American countries. Other products include buttons, 
clocks, and foundry and machine-shop products. 

People from nearby Farmington bought the \\'ater- 
bury area from Indians in 1674. They established a 
frontier outpost called Mattaluck. The name became 
Waterbury when the town was incorporated in 1686. 
The manufacture of brass goods began in 1802. Water- 
bun' received its city charter in 1853. It has a mayor- 
council type of government. albert e. Van dusen 

WATERED STOCK. See .Stock, Capital. 

WATERFALL is any sudden descent of a stream from a 
higher to a lower level. In wearing down its channel, a 
river uncovers certain layei-s of rock that are softer than 
others. If the hard rock is farther upstream than the soft, 
the channel below is worn more rapidly, and a waterfall 
results. Sometimes the hard ledge forms the edge of a 
vertical cliff, over which the water plunges. 

If the volume of water is small, the fall may be called 
a cascade. If the volume of water is large, a fall of this 
sort is called a cataract. Niagara Falls is such a cataract. 
Other noted cataracts are \'ictoria Falls on the Zam- 
bezi River in Africa, the Falls of the Iguagu near the 
Parana River in .South America, and the Grand Falls 
of the Hamilton River in Labrador. Usually, however, 
the term cataract is applied to a series of rapids or falls 
caused by the flow of the stream over a rapidly sloping 
rocky bed. Examples of these are the cataracts of the 
Nile and the Orinoco rivers. Cataracts which have 
small, gradual falls are termed rapids. Some of the most 
noted rapids in North America are those at Sault Sainte 
Marie, at the outlet of Lake Superior, and the rapids 
in the Saint Lawrence River. 

Small waterfalls or cascades are often of great height. 
Such are the L'pper Yosemite Falls in California, 1,430 
feet high; the Sutherland, New Zealand. 1,904 feet; and 
the Staubbach of the .Mps, 980 feet. Some lower water- 
falls are noted for their beauty. These include Mont- 
morency Falls, near Quebec; Multnomah Falls, on the 
Columbia Ri\er, Oregon; numerous cascades in the 
Rocky and Selkirk mountains; and the Upper and 
Lower falls in Yellowstone National Park. 

Falls usually occur in mountainous countries. But 
sometimes they are caused by the descent of streams to 
a flood plain. The line along which several rivers flowing 
into the same body of water descend to this lower level 
is called the fall line. The fall line of those rivers south 
of Chesapeake Bay which flow into the Atlantic Ocean 
is marked by the location of manufacturing cities whose 
sites were chosen because the\- were near water power, 
which later became even more valuable as hydroelectric 
power. E.xamples of these industrial centers are Rich- 



III 



WATERFALLS OF THE WORLD 



-1,500 ft.. 



Each waterfall is drawn to scale, and is shown as it appears in its 
natural setting. In cases where a series of falls have the same name 
and are sometimes considered to be one fall, only the highest is shown. 



I.OOOff 






WATERFALLS OF NORTH AMERICA 








Niagara 


Yellowstone 


Vernol 


Yosemite 


Illilouette 


New York 


Lower Falls 


California 


Lower Falls 


California 


193 ft. 


Wyoming 
308 ft. 


317 feet. 


California 
320 ft. 


370 ft. 



Nevada 

California 
594 ft. 



Bridolveil 

California 
620 ft. 



-2,000 ft.- 



OTHERS WATERFALLS OF THE WORLD 



-1,500 ft.- 




Giessbacli 


Victoria 


Suttierland 


Gersoppc 


King Edward VIII 


Veltis 


Trummelbach 


Switzerland 


Rhodesia 


New Zealand 


India 


British Gutano 


Norway 


Switzerland 


1 90 ft. 


355 ft. 


8 1 5 ft. 


830 ft. 


840 ft. 


850 ft. 


950 ft 


(total — 




(tolal— 1,904 ft.) 










980 ft.) 
















Staubbach 


Krimml 


Tugela 


Govarnie 


Roraima 


Kukenaom 


Angel 






South Africa 


France 


on Brazil- 


Venezuela 


Venezuela 


980 ft. 


1,250 ft. 


1,350 ft. 
(total — 3,110 ft.) 


1,385 ft. 


British Guiana- 
Venezuela border 
2,000 ft. 


2,000 ft. 


2,648 ft. 
(total — 
3,212 ft.) 



WATERFORD 

mond, Va., Raleigh, N.C., Augusta and Columbus, Ga., 
and Columbia, S.C. 

A picture chart of important waterfalls of the world, 
showing their location and height, will be found on the 

two preceding pages. Samuel N. Dicken 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Africa 
Maletsunyane Falls 
Stanley Falls 

Asia and Australia 

Gersoppa, Falls of Sutherland Falls Wollomombi Fall 

Europe 

Skykje Falls 

Staubbach 

Terni Waterfall 



Tugela Falls 
Victoria Falls 



Gavarnie Falls 
Kile Falls 
Maidal Falls 
Skjaeggedals 



Triimmelbach 

Vettisfoss 

Voringfoss 



North America 



Niagara Falls and Niagara River 
Reversing Falls of Saint John 
Ribbon Falls 
Takakkaw Falls 
Yosemite Falls 



Bridalveil Fall 
Fairy Falls 

Falls of Saint Anthony 
Minnehaha Falls 
Multnomah Falls 
Nevada Falls 

South America 
Angel Falls Kukenaam Falls Roraima Falls 

King George VI Falls Marina Falls 

Unclassified 
Fall Line Igua^u River 

WATERFORD, IVAH In ferd (pop. 28,216; alt. 25 ft.), 
is a seaport on the southeastern coast of Ireland. The 
city lies on the west bank of the Suir River in County 
Waterford (see Ireland [map]). 

The "Old Guard" at the Battle of Waterloo made a brave 
stand against overwhelming odds. The veteran French soldiers 
lived up to the motto: "The Old Guard dies, but never surrenders!" 

Joseph BoBgs Bealo, Modern Enterprises 




Waterford has a glass industry, shoe and boot fac- 
tories, flour mills, food-processing plants, an iron 
foundry, and a brewery. Since the 1 700's, Waterford 
cut glass has been famous throughout the world. Viking 
invaders founded Waterford in the 800's. x.w. Freeman 

WATERLOO, Iowa (pop. 71,755; alt. 850 ft.), is a 
meat-packing and farm-machinery manufacturing cen- 
ter in northeastern Iowa. It lies on the Cedar River 
about 90 miles northeast of Des Moines. .Some of the 
best livestock in the world are exhibited each fall at 
the National Dairy Cattle Congress in Waterloo. The 
first settlers, who arrived in 1845, called the place 
Prairie Rapids, but the name was changed to VV'aterloo 
in 1851 . Waterloo was incorporated as a city in 1868. It 
has a mavor-council government. Wieuam |. Petersen 

WATERLOO, BATTLE OF, fought on June 18, 1815, 
was the final battle of the French military genius. 
Napoleon Bonaparte. It put an end to his political am- 
bitions to rule Europe. His defeat was so crushing that, 
when a person suffers a disastrous reverse, we say he has 
"met his Waterloo." 

Napoleon Returns to France. After abdicating in 
1814. Napoleon was exiled to the island of Elba, off the 
coast of Italy. He spent less than a year there before 
he decided to return to rule France. He saw that the 
allies at the Congress of Vienna seemed unable to settle 
their differences, and he hoped to take advantage of 
this split to regain power. 

But the allies joined forces against Napoleon as soon 
as they heard of his return to France. Each ally again 
promised to supply 150.000 troops against him. Na- 
poleon marched north into Belgium to meet this threat. 
The Duke of Wellington commanded the allied forces 
of Great Britain, Prussia, Belgium, and The Nether- 
lands. Neither commander had good intelligence serv- 
ices. Napoleon was not in good health at the time, and 
failed to display his earlier energy and military grasp. 

The Battle took place at Waterloo, a small town near 
Brussels, The two armies were about equal in size. 
Napoleon had about 74,000 troops, and superior cavalry 
and artillery, Wellington had about 67,000 troops. He 
placed them in a strong defensive position. The French 
started a fierce attack against the allied lines on June 18, 
Wellington's troops held firm against the French 
assaults. 

Napoleon might have won at Waterloo if he had 
attacked earlier in the day. But he waited until noon 
because of a heavy rain the night before. This delay 
permitted Marshal Gcbhard von Bliicher to arrive with 
his Prussian troops to reinforce Wellington. The batUe 
was a draw until the arrival of Bliicher's forces. These 
forces helped turn the battle against the French. 

Napoleon made one last effort to win the battle. He 
flung his best troops, the famous "Old Guard," against 
the enemy's lines. I'hree battalions of the Guard ad- 
vanced and fought bravely, but were overwhelmed. 
The French then fled from a fierce bayonet counter- 
attack in hopeless retreat. 

Both sides lost many killed and wounded in the bat- 
tle. The French sulTered about 40,000 casualties, and 
the allies about 23,000. After tliis defeat. Napoleon 
failed to gather a new army. He had no choice left but 
to abdicate a second time. Robert b. Holtman 

See also Blijcher, Gebhard L. von; Napoleon I; 
Wellington, Duke of. 



WATERLOO, UNIVERSITY OF, is a nondenomi- 
national coeducational university in Waterloo, Ont., 
Canada. It grants degrees in liberal arts, engineering, 
and science. The university was established in 1956 as a 
part of the University of Western Ontario. In 1959, 
it became an independent degree-granting institution. 
For enrollment, see Canada (Education [table]). 

WATERLOO LUTHERAN UNIVERSITY is a Ludieran 
coeducational institution in Waterloo, Ont., Canada. 
It grants degrees in theology and liberal arts. From 
1925 to 1960, the school was affiliated with the Uni- 
versity of Western Ontario as Waterloo College. For 
enrollment, see Canada (Education [table]). 

WATERMARK is an identifying mark pressed into 
paper as it is formed by a papennaking machine. 
Usually, it is the inark left by wires bent into the water- 
mark pattern and attached to the dandy roll of a Four- 
drinier machine (see Paper [diagram. How Paper Is 
Made]). As the wire pattern conies into contact with the 
layer of wet pulp, a translucent impression is made, 
which can be seen when the finished paper is held in 
front of a light. Watermarked paper is often used for 
documents, to prevent counterfeiting. John b. Calkin 

WATERMELON is a vine plant that produces large 
green fruits with delicious red (sometimes yellow) pulp. 
The plant is related to the pumpkin, squash, musk- 
melon, and cucumber. The fruit is 93 per cent water, 
and has a sweet, refreshing taste. 

The fruit has a hard rind (outer shell) that is com- 
pletely filled with pulp. This pulp colors as the fruit 
ripens. The seeds found in the pulp may be white, 
brown, or black. The vines may branch out 12 to 15 
feet in all directions. The few fruits they produce are 
large. Watermelons average between 20 and 35 pounds, 
and they often weigh 40, 50, or even 60 pounds. They 
may be round, oblong, or oval. Their color varies from 
plain dark green to mottled and striped green, or al- 
most white. 

.Scientists have produced many varieues of water- 
melons. Bantam-size watermelons that weigh only 
5 to 10 pounds and giant watermelons \s'cighing over 
100 pounds have been developed. Seedless watermelons 
are now on the market. 

The watermelon is a warm-season crop, but it grows 
as far north as Canada. The seeds should not be planted 
until the heat of summer has come. Watermelons grow- 
best in sandy, moist soils. The vine has many blooms, 
but only a few of the blossoms produce melons. The 
vines are so long that the plants must be spaced 8 to 
10 feet apart. For best flavor, the fruit should not 
be picked until fully ripe. The fruits ripen in 80 to 90 
days, depending on the variety. Most varieties are 
ripe when the rind gets very hard and the melon sounds 
hollow when tapped. The skin of a recently developed 
midget watermelon turns golden when it is ripe. 

The same insects that damage cucumbers attack 
watermelons. A serious disease called anthracnose also 
attacks the fruit. This disease may be controlled by 
spraying with maneb and zif^eb fungicides. Several varie- 
ties resist anthracnose. Farmers rotate watemielon 
acreage to help control diseases. 

History. The plant first grew in Africa, and spread to 
southern Asia in early times. David Livingstone, the 
famous Scottish explorer, regarded the watermelon as 
the most interesting plant in the South African desert. 




Hid Biiok ph.il.. 

The Charleston Gray Watermelon is one of the newest and 
most popular watermelon varieties grown In the United States. 



Large areas of land are almost smothered with these 
melons in years of heavy rainfall. The watermelon forms 
a regular part of the diet of many nations. It is still the 
principal source of food and drink for the Egyptians for 
several months of the year. 

The people of North America have long used the 
watermelon as a type of lirxury food. Watermelons were 
plentiful in Massachusetts Colony as early as 1629. In 



LEADING WATERMELON GROWING STATES 



Tons of watermelon grown each year 



Florida 

386,000 (ons 

Texas 

247,000 tons 

California 

160,000 tors 

Georgia 

1 56,000 tons 

South Carolina 

108,000 tons 



^ &lt;^ &lt;^ ^ 

&lt;^ &lt;^ ^ ^ 



^ 



Based on a 4-year average of government statistics. 

1673, Father Marquette noted the abundance of water- 
melons along the Wisconsin and Mississippi rivers. 
Watermelons were raised by the Indian tribes along the 
Colorado River in 1 799. Today, watermelons are pro- 
duced chiefly in the southern part of the L'nited States. 
Scientific Classification. Watermelons belong to the 
gourd family, Cucurhilaceae. They are genus Cilruihis^ 
species C. vulgaris. Ervin l. denisen 

See also \'e(;etable (Planting Table for Vegetables). 
WATERPROOF MATCH. See Match (History). 



"5 



WATERPROOFING 

WATERPROOFING is a way of treating cloth, leather, 
wood, or other materials so that they will shed water. 
Many different chemical solutions are used in water- 
proofing. Nearly all of them work by forming a protec- 
tive coating over the material to be waterproofed. 

Materials which have tiny pores, or holes, in them are 
often soaked in solutions of rubber, boiled linseed oil, 
paraffin wa.x, or some other substance which is itself 
waterproof. The waterproof solution fills the pores. Sili- 
cone is widely used to waterproof clothing and building 
materials (see Silicone). 

The textile industry uses the most advanced methods 
of waterproofing. The fibers of cloth may be coated 
either before or after they are woven. Water-repellent 
solutions sold in spray containers are available for home 
use. 

In 1823, Charles Macintosh of England invented a 
waterproof fabric made of cloth and rubber. A raincoat 
made of his protective material came to be commonly 
known as a mackintosh. The Japanese have waterproofed 
paper umbrellas for centuries by dipping the paper in a 

simple chemical solution. Elizabeth Cheslev Baity 

WATERS, ETHEL (1900- ), a Negro actress and 
singer, overcame many hardships to become a leading 
performer on the American 
stage and screen. She sang 
in the musicals Lew Leslie's 
Blackbirds (\930\ As Thou- 
sands Cheer ( 1 933), and Cabin 
in the Sky (\9¥)). 

Her great dramatic hits 

were Mamba's Daughters 

(1939) and Member of the 

1 1 'edding ( 1 950). She starred 

in the motion pictures 

Cabin in the iXy (1943) and 

/&gt;;«Xj (1949). She began her 

Alfredo vaientc Career as a night-club singer 

Ethel Waters at the age of seventeen. 

Miss Waters was born in 

Chester, Pa. She wrote an autobiography, His Eye Is on 

the Sparrolt' (\95]). Mary Virginia Heinlein 

WATERSHED. See Divide. 

WATERSPOUT is a tornado that occurs over an ocean 
or lake. Its violent winds can damage ships. It is not a 
column of water rising out of the sea, but a whirling 
column of air and watery mist. Some sea or lake water 
may be drawn up at the base of the column. But even 
in ocean waterspouts, most of the water is fresh water 
formed by condensation. Condensation occurs when 
moist air rushes into the low pressure area at the center 
of the column. Because of the low pressure, the air 
expands and cools rapidly. As the air cools, water 
vapor in it condenses into a liquid, forming a mist. 

See also ToR.NADO. Walter J.Saucier 

WATERTON-GLACIER INTERNATIONAL PEACE 
PARK is on the United States-Canadian boundaiy line 
between Montana and Alberta. It covers over 1.000,- 
000 acres on the United States side, and over 1 30.000 
acres on the Canadian side. The park unites Glacier 
National Park in Montana with Waterton Lakes 
National Park in Alberta. Nicholas Helburn 

See also Glacier National Park. 




WATERTON LAKES NATIONAL PARK. See Canada 
(National Parks). 

WATERTOWN, Mass. (pop. 39,092; alt. 20 ft.), is an 
industrial and residential suburb of Boston in eastern 
Massachusetts (see Mass.achusetts [map]). Products 
include foods; machinery; and metal, paper, and nib- 
ber products. A U.S. arsenal has operated in Water- 
town since 1816. Sir Richard Saltonstall founded 
\Vatertown in 1630. The city has a representative 
town meeting government. William j. Reid 

WATERWAY is a water route suitable for boat and 
barge traffic. Nature provides many waterways, such 
as lakes and rivers, while others are man-made. The 
most famous man-made waterways include the Erie 
Canal, Panama Canal, St. Lawrence Seaway, and Suez 
Canal. 

See also Canal; Inland Waterway, \vith their lists 
of Related Articles. 

WATERWAYS EXPERIMENT STATION, U.S. See 
Mississippi (Places to \"isit). 

WATERWORKS. See Water Supply. 

WATIE, STAND (1806-1871), became the only Indian 
brigadier general in the Confederate Army. Born near 
Rome, Ga., he moved to Oklahoma with the Cherokee 
Indians in 1838 and became a tribal leader. Watie 
entered the army when the Cherokee allied with the 
Confederacy in 1861. He led a regiment of Cherokee 
volunteers called the Cherokee Mounted Rifles. In 
1864, he was made a brigadier general. Watie was one 
of the last Confederate officers to surrender. After the 
war, he farmed in Oklahoma. 

WATKINS GLEN. See Finger Lakes. 

WATKINS MILL. See Missouri (Places to Visit). 

WATLING ISLAND. Sec Bahamas. 

WATSON, HOMER (1856-1936), was a Canadian 
landscape painter. His works show the beauty and 
majesty of Canadian woods, fields, and streams. 
VV^atson was the first president of the Canadian Art 
Club, and was president of the Royal Canadian 
Academy from 1918 to 1922. He was born at Doon, 
Ont. He studied landscape painting for a time in Great 
Britain and the United States. Some of his landscapes 
are in Windsor Castle. w. R. Willouohby 



The Whirling Column of a Waterspout, stretching between 
the ocean's surface and a low cloud, is an amazing sight. 

Science Service 




ii6 



WATSON, JAMES DEWEY (1928- ), is an Ameri- 
can biologist. He shared the 1962 Nobel prize in phys- 
iology and medicine with biologist Francis H. C. Crick 
and biophysicist Maurice H. F. Wilkins, both of Great 
Britain. Watson and Crick, on the basis of research 
by Wilkins, devised a model of the molecular structure 
of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). DNA serves to carry 
genetic information from one generation to the next. 
See Nucleic Acid. 

The so-called Watson-Crick model looks like a twisted 
ladder. The sequence of certain chemicals on successive 
"rungs" of DNA fomis a code that determines such 
things as size, structure, and function in an organism. 
Watson published his findings when he was 25 years old. 
Born in Chicago, he studied at the University of Chicago 
and Indiana University. In 1961, he became professor 
of biology at Harvard University. Irwin h. Herskowitz 

See also Bioloc;y (picture). 

WATSON, JOHN BROADUS (1878-1958), an .Ameri- 
can psychologist, became best known as the leader of a 
revolutionaiy movement in psychology called behavior- 
ism. His early work in biology, medicine, and the be- 
havior of lower organisms led him to question the exist- 
ence of the mental processes which psychologists claimed 
to be studying. He undertook to account for the be- 
havior of both man and animals in purely physiological 
and physical terms, as discussed in his Psychology from 
the Standpoint of a Behaviorist (1919). 

Watson also rejected the notion of innate abilities. 
He claimed that in the proper environment a healthy 
child would acquire any given talent or skill. He studied 
the emotional behavior of children and expressed strong 
views on child care. For example, he cautioned parents 
against the possible ill effects of strong displays of affec- 
tion. Although his extreme views are not widely held 
today, he was an important "ice-breaking" influence in 
the history of psychology, particularly in the United 
States. 

Watson was born in Greenville, S.C. He received a 
Ph.D. degree in psychology at the University of Chi- 
cago. He later worked at Johns Hopkins University. 
In 1920, he retired from his scientific career to enter the 
field of advertising. B. F. Smnner 

See also Psychology (Behaviorism). 

WATSON, THOMAS AUGUSTUS. See Bell, Alex- 
ander Gr.'^h.am; Telephone (Histon'). 

WATSON, THOMAS EDWARD (1856-1922), was an 
American political leader. Elected to the United States 
House of Representatives as a Democrat in 1890, he 
joined the new Populist party, which represented the 
farmers (see Populist Party). The Populists nominated 
Watson for Vice-President of the United States in 1896 
and for President in 1904. As a newspaper editor and 
author in Atlanta and New York City, he agitated for 
radical reforms. He later became a Democrat again, and 
was elected to the Senate in 1920. Watson was born 
near Thoinson, Ga. nelson m. blake 

WATSON, THOMAS JOHN (1874-1956), was one of 
the most famous American industrialists. He worked 
for the National Cash Register Company for 15 years. 
Then in 1914, he was made president of a company 
which became International Business Machines Cor- 
poration in 1924. Under his leadership from 1914 to 
1956, the company became an international organiza- 
tion. Watson also served as an officer or director in many 



WATT, JAMES 

patriotic and professional organizations. He was born 
in Campbell, N.Y. w. h. Bauohn 

WATSON-WATT, SIR ROBERT ALEXANDER (1892- 
), a Scottish electronics engineer and inventor, 
helped develop radar. He patented in 1935 a radar de- 
vice that could detect and follow a flying airplane. 
It is doubtful if Great Britain could have sui'vived Ger- 
man air attacks in 1940 without radar. Watson-Watt 
invented a primitive form of radio direction finder in 
1919 while associated with the British weather bureau 
He described the finder as "useful for meteorological 
purposes such as the location of atmospheric discharges." 
He received his patent while doing radio research with 
the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
and the National Physical Laboratory. See Radar 
(British Developments). 

Watson-\Vatt was born in Brechin, Scotland, and 
was graduated from University College at St. Andrew's 
University. He was knighted in 1942, He received many 
other honors, including the Hughes medal of the Royal 
Society, the United States Medal of Merit, and many 
honorary degrees. G. gamow 

WATT, waht, is a unit for measuring power, or the rate 
at which work is being done. It was named for James 
Watt. In electricity, a watt is equal to the flow of one 
ampere at a pressure of one volt (watts = volts X am- 
peres). A watt-hour is the amount of electrical energy 
used to keep a one-watt unit working for one hour. 
Wattage is usually expressed in kilowatts (1,000 watts). 
Mechanical energy may also be measured in watts. 
A kilowatt is equal to about 1.34 horsepower, and 746 
watts equal one horsepower. See also Ampere; Horse- 
power; Kilowatt; Volt; Wattmeter. d. d. Ewing 

WATT, JAMES (1736-1819), was a Scottish engineer 
whose improved engine design first made steam power 
practicable. Crude steam engines were used before 
Watt's time, but they burned large amounts of coal 
and produced little power. Their lateral (back-and- 
forth) motion restricted their use to operating pumps. 
Watt's invention of the "separate condenser" made 
steam engines more efficient, and his later improve- 
ments made possible their wide application. 

Watt, the son of a shopkeeper and carpenter, was 
born in Greenock on Jan. 19, 1736. When he was 18, 
he went to Glasgow and then to London to learn the 
trade of a mathematical instrument maker. In 1 757, he 
became instrument inaker at the University of Glasgow. 

The Sfeam Engine. In 1763, Watt received a model 
of a Newcomen steam engine to repair. Although he 
iriade it work, he was not satisfied with how it operated 
and set about to improve it. He obtained advice from 
students and professors at the university, and dis- 
covered the principle of the separate condenser. 
He patented his discoveiy in 1 769. 

In the old engines, steam filled the cylinder space 
under the piston. The steam was then condensed, 
leaving a vacuum into which the piston was pushed b\' 
atmospheric pressure. This meant alternately heating 
and chilling the cylinder. Watt reasoned that because 
steam was an elastic vapor, it would fill any container 
into which it was admitted. If the steam-filled cylinder 
opened into a separate, chilled container, steam would 
continually move into the container and condense 



117 




Buncly Tuhine Co. 

James Watt Used Steam Coils to heat hi$ office in 1784. 
This WG5 the first procticol use of steam for heating. 

there, producing the vacuum in the cyHnder without 
having to chill it (see Condenser, Steam). 

Watt spent several years trying to develop an operat- 
ing engine of the new design. He also worked as a sur- 
veyor and construction engineer during this period. 
In 1774, he obtained the support of Matthew Boulton, 
an energetic Birmingham manufacturer. Boulton per- 
suaded Parliament to renew Watt's patent for 25 
years. The two then organized a company to rent the 
design of the new engine and to supervise its construc- 
tion and operation. The firm succeeded. 

Watt developed crank movements so the engine 
could turn wheels. He also invented an "expansive, 
double-acting" engine, a throttle valve, a governor for 
regulating engine speed, and many other devices. He 
did scientific research in chemistry and metallurgy, 
and was one of the first persons to suggest that water is 
a compound, not an element. He retired as a wealthy 
man in 1800. The power unit, the watt, is named in 
his honor (see Watt). Robert e. schofield 

See also Industrial Revolution (The Steam En- 
gine; picture); .Steam Engine (History). 
WATT-HOUR METER. See Electric Meter. 
WATTEAU, wah TOH, ANTOINE (1684-1721), a 
French painter, introduced the style of delicately ro- 
mantic art that became popular in France during the 
1700's. In 1717, he painted his most celebrated picture, 
The Embarkation for Cylhera, which hangs in the Louvre 
in Paris. The picture gained him the honor of member- 
ship in the French Academy. It appears in color in the 
Painting article. Antoine Watteau's art is notable 
for its small scale, exquisite 
coloring, and charming de- 
sign. In his softly lighted 
glades and parks, surpris- 
ingly realistic young men 
and women wander, talk- 
ing or making love. These 
pictures suggest a haunt- 
ingly melancholy world 
where people live the 
dreams that real life denies 
them. The materials of the 
costumes have the glow and 
the shine of real cloth, and 
the bodies are sJive and 



Antoine Watteau 




solid, but the parks and hills seem insubstantial and 
dreamlike. This sentimental attitude toward life repre- 
sented a reaction to the stiff formality of the age of 
Louis XIV. Pictures such as Watteau painted became 
immensely popular in an escapist society moving to- 
ward the French Revolution of 1 789. Gillcs and The 
Mezzetin represent some of his best work. His drawings 
established his reputation as a master in that field. 

He was born Jean Antoine Watteau in \'alen- 
cicnnes, Flanders, and came to Paris as a young man in 
1 702. Watteau worked under several masters, including 
Claude Gillot and Claude Audran. Pierre Crozat, a 
wealthy collector of pictures, took the young painter 
into his household and gave him commissions, after 
which Watteau's fortunes improved. Joseph c. Sloane 

See also Engr.wing (picture, The Family). 

WATTERSON, HENRY (1840-1921), an American 
newspaper editor, won the 1918 Pulitzer prize for edi- 
torial writing. He was associated in 1868 in the con- 
solidation of Louisville's newspapers into the Courier- 
Journal, and was its outspoken editor for 50 years. He 
hated slavery and thought secession wrong, but out of 
loyalty to the South served in the Confederate Army 
during the Civil War. Watterson left the Courier-Journal 
in 1919 because that paper supported the League of 
Nations. He was born in Washington, D.C. alvin e. Austin 

WATTLE, a shrub or tree. See Acacia. 

WATTMETER is an instrument used to measure elec- 
trical power. There are several kinds of wattmeters. The 
one most commonly used is called an electrodynamic 
wattmeter. The electrodynamic wattmeter has two coils 
of wire. \ fixed coW. is arranged to receive the current of 
the circuit to be measured. A movable coil, supported by 
jeweled pivots that permit it to turn, is arranged to 




Simpson Electric Co. 

A Wattmeter is used to measure electrical power in watts. The 
electric current forces a coil against o spring. A pointer attached 
to the spring moves across a scale and indicates the power. 



ii8 



receive a current proportional to the voltage. When the 
circuit is energized, the magnetic fields produced by the 
currents make the movable coil tiy to turn so that its 
axis is parallel to the axis of the fixed coil. Spiral springs 
cause it to come to rest in a position that depends on 
the power in the circuit. A pointer shows the power in 
watts on a suitable scale. benjamin j. d.asher 

WATTS, GEORGE FREDERIC (1817-1904), a British 
painter, is remembered for his portraits of famous men 
of his time. He also painted historical and legendaiy 
subjects. These pictures were always sentimental. Watts 
married Ellen Terry, who later became a celebrated 
actress. She served as a model for one of his best-known 
paintings. Sir Galahad. He also painted Life's Ilhisiom, 
The Good Samaritan, Love and Life, Orpheus and Eurydicc, 
Hope, and The Minotaur. He was born in London, and 
studied at the Royal Academy schools. Lester d. Longman 

See also Galah.\d, Sir (picture). 

WATTS, ISAAC (1674-1748), an English clergyman, 
wrote 761 hymns and psalms, 29 treatises on theology, 
volumes of sermons, and many books on ethics, psy- 
chology, and teaching. His best hymns are notable for 
simplicity of poetic structure, apt use of figures of speech, 
and emotional vitality. Many of his finest hymns still 
appear in nearly every English hymnal. He wrote 
"Joy to the Worid," "O God, Our Help in Ages Past," 
""When I Survey the Wondrous Cross," and '"There is a 
Land of Pure Delight." 

Watts was born in Southampton, England. His fam- 
ily disagreed so actively with the Established Church 
that his father was jailed three times. Watts becaine 
pastor of London's Mark Lane Independent Chapel in 
1 702. He was considered one of the great preachers 

of his time. Arthur L. Rich 

WATUSI. See Burundi (The People); Rwanda; 
Africa (color picture. Tribal Dancing). 

WAUGH, waw, is the family name of two British 
writers, brothers. Their father was Arthur Waugh (1866- 
1943), a journalist and publisher. 

Alec Waugh (1898- ) wrote many fictional and 
nonfictional books based on his travels. His West In- 
dian novel. Island in the Sun (1956), became a best-seller 
and a motion picture. He also wrote Hot Countries {\930), 
Wheels Within Wheels (1933), The Balliols (1934), and 
The Sugar Islands (1948). He was born Alexander 
Raban Waugh at Hampstead, and was educated at 
Sherborne. Waugh attacked the school in his first 
novel. The Loom of Youth (1917). 

Evelyn Arthur St. John Waugh (1903- ) scored 
his first successes as a novelist with Decline and Fall 
(1928), Vile Bodies (1930), 
and A Handful of Dust 
(1934). Many of his later 
works, such as the biog- 
raphy Edmund Campion 
(1935), reflect his conver- 
sion to Roman Catholicism 
in 1930. His Brideshead 
Revisited ( 1 945) was a great 
success in America. It 
combined Waugh's early 
satiric attitude with one of 
philosophy and religion. 
Other works include The 
Loved One (194:8), a brilliant 



Evelyn Waugh 

Yevonde, London 




WAVERLEY NOVELS 

satire; and a trilogy about Army life during World 
War II, which consists of Men at Arms (1952), Officers 
and Gentlemen (1955), and The End of the Battle (1962). 
Waugh was born in London. He was educated at 
O.xford University. Harry t. Moore 

WAUKEGAN, waw KEE guhn. 111. (pop. 55,719; alt. 
595 ft.), lies on Lake Michigan, almost midway be- 
tween Chicago, 111., and Milwaukee, Wis. (see Illinois 
[color map]). It has over 100 factories, producing more 
than 400 different products. The area received the In- 
dian name Waukegan, or Little Fort, because settlers be- 
lieved that early French traders had built a fort there. 
The seat of Lake County, it has a mayor-council type 

of government. Paul M. Ancle 

WAUWATOSA, WAW wuh TOH suh, Wis. (pop. 56,- 
923; alt. 650 ft.), is an industrial suburb west of Mil- 
waukee. Its industries manufacture chemicals, concrete 
blocks, and wood and metal products. Wauwatosa was 
settled in 1835 and incorporated as a city in 1897. The 
city has a mayor-council government. For location, see 
Wisconsin (color map). james i. Clark 

WAVE BAND is a group of radio frequencies used for 
one purpose, such as commercial, ship-to-shore, ama- 
teur, airplane, or police broadcasting. Wave band also 
refers to a smaller group of frequencies set aside for a 
single broadcaster called a station. 

Engineers set each radio transmitter so diat its carrier 
wave remains at a certain frequency. But because sounds 
modulate (change) the frequency slightly, each station 
uses a band of frequencies to prevent interference with 
other stations. Most stations allow a margin of five 
kilocycles on either side of their carrier wave. Two sta- 
tions using the same frequency must be many miles 
apart. Otherwise they interfere with one another (see 
Interference). In the United States, the Federal Com- 
munications Commission assigns frequencies. 

Ordinary broadcasting uses a low-frequency band 
that ranges from approximately 500 to 1 ,500 kilocycles. 
Amateur radio operators, frequency modulation (FM), 
and television use high-frequency wave bands, or short 

waves. Palmer H. Craig 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Frequency Modulation Television (Channels) 
Radio (Radio Waves) Ultrahigh Frequency Wave 

Short Wave Very High Frequency Wave 

WAVE LENGTH. See Light (Electromagnetic Waves); 
Radio (Radio Waves). 

WAVE MECHANICS. See Physics (Relativity and 
Quanta); Atom (Modern Theories). 

WAVE THEORY. See Light (The Nature of Light). 

WAVELL, WAT vul, ARCHIBALD PERCIVAL (1883- 
1950), Viscount Wavell of Ov'renaica and Tripoli- 
tania, was a British soldier and statesman. He was born 
near his father's army post in Essex, and attended Win- 
chester College and the Royal Military College at 
Sandhurst. During World War I, he served in France 
and in the Middle East. At the beginning of World War 
II, he took command of all British army forces in the 
Middle East and successfully defended Egypt against 
an Italian invasion in 1940. In 1941 he became com- 
mander in chief of British forces in India. From 1943 to 
1947, Wavell served as viceroy of India. c. L. mowat 

WAVERLEY NOVELS. See Scott, Sir Walter. 



119 





TRANSVERSE WAVES 

Ripples in a quiet pool of water form transverse waves. They 
are called fronsverse, because the particles of water move up 
and down. The length of these waves, above, is measured from 
crest to crest, ond their amplitude, or height, from the water 
surface to a crest or a trough. Light, radio, and heat waves are 
also transverse waves. The drawing, be/ow, shows a train of 
transverse waves as if seen sideways at water level. 




Harold M. Lambert 



WAVES are rising and falling motions that are passed 
on from particle to particle of a substance. They are 
caused by some disturbance. The most familiar kind of 
wave is the rising and falling motion that is seen on the 
surface of water. But this type of motion is not found m 
water alone. Other types of waves cannot be seen and 
are known only by the effects they produce. These 
waves carry energy from one place to another. For exam- 
ple, sound is transferred from one point to another by 
waves known as sound waves. Light travels through 
space in another kind of wave known as light waves. 
Heat is also transferred from place to place by waves. 
Radio and television are possible because of the dis- 
turbances known as radio waves, which carry energy to 
the receiving set. Light, heat, and radio waves are forms 
of radiant energy. Other forms of radiant energy include 
ultraviolet rays, X rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. 

Wave Motion 

In order to understand just what wave motion is, it 
is necessary to understand the simple water wave. If a 
stone is dropped into a pool of calm water, the surface 
of the water will soon be covered with many circles that 
will widen out from the center where the stone fell. The 
water will appear to be moving outward from the 
central point. This is not the case. The water does not 
really move outward at all. It simply rises and then falls 
again. It is the wave motion that moves outward. The 
energy of one wave is transferred on to the neighboring 
]jarticles of water and causes another wave. This in 
turn causes still another wave until a train of waves is 
produced. Thus, wave motion is an importapt way to 



TRAIN OF WAVES 



transfei energy from one place to another without in- 
volving an actual transfer of matter. 

Wind produces water waves in a lake or ocean. These 
waves seem to be moving toward the shore. What 
actually happens is that the wind lifts particles of water 
and the force of gravity pulls the water down again. 
This causes the water to vibrate to a definite rhythm. 
To the eye it seems as though the water is moving for- 
ward. But there is simply a rising and falling in the same 
place. This can be proved by tossing a light substance, 
such as a cork, into a pool of wavy water. The cork will 
merely bob up and down as the wave passes. It will not 
be carried forward with the wave. 

The substance through which a wave travels is known 
as the medium. In the case of the water waves, water is 
the medium. We must remember that the medium it- 
self does not move forward. It is the energy of the wave 
that moves forward. This movement is known as wave 
motion. Another example of wave motion can be shown 
by fastening one end of a rope to a rigid wall, and then 
rapidly moving the free end up and down. Each jerk 
travels along the rope and each portion of the rope 
transfers the jerk along to the next portion. Here again, 
the rope moves up and down, while the waves move 
forward along the rope. 

Special Characteristics of Waves 
All wave motions have certain characteristics in com- 
mon. For one thing, all waves except light waves 
must have a medium in which to travel. Sound waves, 
for example, travel through air, wood, or water. If 
there is no medium, sound can no longer travel. Unlike 



I 20 



sound, light waves can travel through empty space. An- 
other characteristic of all waves is that in a train of 
waves each wave follows the other at a definite interval. 
This means that every wave has a certain length and 
that it takes a definite time to travel from one place to 
another. 

The length of a wave can be understood by noticing 
the water wave again. As the water moves up and down, 
the high point of the wave is called the crest. The low 
point, where the water goes down, is called the trough. 
One crest and one trough together form a wave. The 
wave length is the distance from crest to crest or 
from trough to trough. The two corresponding points, 
whether crests or troughs, are said to be in die same 
phase. A wave is measured not only lengtliwise, but also 
by its height. The height of a wave is known as its 
amplitude. The amplitude of a water wave is equal to 
one half of the vertical distance between the crest and 
the trough. In other words, the amplitude of a water 
wave, for example, can be measured from the normal 
level of the water to either the highest or lowest point of 
the wave. The distance that the crest of a wave travels 
in one second is called its velocity. The number of crests 
that pass a certain point in one second is known as its 
frequeruy. The frequency of a group of waves describes 
the number of vibrations, or complete waves, a second. 

There is a definite relationship between velocity, fre- 
quency, and wave length. The velocity of a wave is 
equal to the frequency multiplied by the wave length. 
This is stated in the formula, v=fl, where v is equal to 
velocity, / is equal to frequency of the waves, and / is 
equal to wave length. For example, if the sound wave 
from a tuning fork has a wave length of 5 feet and there 
are 220 vibrations per second, the velocity of the wave 
would be 1,100 feet per second. 

Wave Forms 

There are two basic types of wave forms. These are 
transverse waves and longitudinal waves. A transverse 
wave is one in which the particles of the substance move 
in an up-and-down direction while the wave moves 
forward in a horizontal direction. The direction in which 
the wave moves is known as the line of propagation. This 
means that in a transverse wave, such as a water wave, 
the substance moves perpendicularly to the line of prop- 
agation. Light waves have transverse properties. In 
fact, all the wave motions which are described as elec- 
tromagnetic, such as radio waves, heat waves, and X 
rays, are transverse. 

Longitudinal waves are also known as compressional 
waves. In this type of a wave, the particles of the sub- 
stance move back and forth in the same direction as the 
motion of the wave. This means that the substance 
moves in the same direction as the line of propagation. 
The best illustration of a longitudinal wave would be to 
attach one end of a long wire spring to a wall. The first 
few turns of the spring should be compressed and then 
released. The turns will then compress the next few 
turns, and tliis will continue to the end of the spring. 
The same process occurs when air is the medium. As 
sound waves, for example, travel through the air, the 
air is compressed and then expanded. This process con- 
tinues until the sound waves strike an object. 

If a wave train, such as that of light, strikes the edge 
of an object, the direction of the wave is changed. This 



LONGITUDINAL WAVES 






Ho-I 



Some kinds of waves are called longitudinal, or compres- 
sional, waves. This is because the particles of the substance 
move bock and forth, or compress and expand, in the 
same direction the wave is traveling. If you pinch the free 
end of a coil spring, obove, a wave of compression travels 
along the spring. A series of such waves appears here. 

is known as diffraction. When two wave trains pass the 
same point in space at the same time, the effect that is 
produced is known as interference. For example, two sets 
of light waves that are equal in amplitude and of 
opposite phase, cancel each other and produce darkness. 
Similarly two sets of sound waves of opposite phase and 
equal amplitude cancel each other and produce silence. 
Two sets of waves of the same phase may add to each 
other and increase the total amplitude. 

A ray of light is a mixture of transverse waves that 
vibrate in all possible directions. By use of a special 
prism it is possible to sort out all of the waves except 
those that vibrate in one certain direction. This process 
is known as polarization, and the light that is passed is 
known as polarized light (see Polarized Light). 

The quantum theory of physics has helped explain 
more fully the nature of light waves. According to this 
theor)', when a substance radiates, or gives off, energs', 
the atoms of the substance vibrate. These vibrations 
travel as waves of a definite frequency, depending upon 
the size of the quanta, or energy units, emitted. See 
Quantum Theory. Robert f. paton 

Related Articles in World Book include: 



Ether 

Heat (Radiation) 

Interference 

Light (The Nature of 

Light) 
Microwave 
Polarized Light 
Radio (Radio Waves) 
Reflection 



Refraction 

Short Wave 

Sound 

Television (How TV Travels 

Through the Air) 
Tidal Wave 

Ultrahigh Frequency Wave 
Very High Frequency Wave 
Vibration 



121 




U.S. Navy 

A United States Navy WAVE in the white service dress uniform 
worn by women in the regulor navy and the navy reserve in 
warm weather. In cold weather, WAVES wear blue uniforms. 



United States Navy WAVES must complete u troining program 
before being assigned to technical or clerical positions in the 
United States or at naval bases in foreign countries. 



WAVES is the popular name for women in the United 
States Nav&gt;'. Most women in the regxilar nav&gt;' and the 
navy reserve do not form a separate organization, or 
corps. But navy nurses belong to a separate group, the 
Navy Nurse Corps. The term VVAX'ES comes from the 
first letters of the official nav\' recruiting expression, 
"Women Accepted for \olunteer Emergency Service," 
used during World War II. 

Enlisted women receive a 10-week recruit training 
at Camp Paul, Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, 111. 
After basic training, many WAVES have additional 
advanced training. Others receive on-the-job instruction 
at their duty posts. The period of enlistment for WAXES 
is three, four, or six years. 

WAVES are subject to the same regulations and re- 
quirements for advancement as men. They enjoy the 
same benefits and privileges. Enlisted \\'A\'ES serve in 
23 of the navy's 65 general service ratings, including 
medical and aviation work. WA\'E officers are com- 
missioned in the line and in such staff corps as the 
medical corps and the supply corps. Line officers are 
assigned to duty in such fields as logistics, communi- 
cations, intelligence, and personnel administration. 

The law prohibits WAVES from serving on aircraft 
engaged in combat missions. They are not allowed to 
serve on board navs' ships, except hospital ships and 
naval transports that carry dependents of naval per- 
sonnel. 

Women first served in the nav\- in World War I. 
The Civil Service Commission declared that women 
were eligible for enlistment in the L'nited States Navy 
Reserve in 1917. More than 1 1 ,000 women served in the 



navy reserve after the L^nited States entered World War 
I. They performed various duties to release enlisted men 
for active duty at sea. All were released from active duty 
before the end of 1919. 

Congress authorized the establishment of the Wom- 
en's Reserve of the L^nited States Naval Reserve in 
1942. This gave volunteer women the opportunity to 
contribute their services during World War II, and 
release men for active duty. Mildred H. McAfee served 
as the first director of the WA\'ES (see McAfee, 
Mildred Helen). 

At the end of World War II, the WAVES had 86,000 
enlisted women and officers. The WA\'ES became a 
permanent part of the regular navy and the naval re- 
serve in 1 948. The regular navy has about 5,500 WAN'ES 
on active duty. The naval reserve has about 5,000 
VVA\'ES on inactive duty, cnticaiiy reviewed by the w.^ves 

WAX is a hard, brittle, fatty substance obtained 
from animal, vegetable, and mineral sources. Nature 
protects most plants, flowers, and fruits with a shield of 
wax. The layer of wax holds in their supply of moisture 
and prevents damage to young plants from the sun's 
hot rays. Wax is not easily affected by oxygen, and 
moisture does not destroy its protective value. These 
properties make wax very useful to man. We have bor- 
rowed nature's use of the substance to protect and 
beautify many man-made objects. As early as the 1 500's, 
the French protected their beautiful parquetry- floors 
with wax. These floors remained unscratched for hun- 
dreds of years. 

Today, there are many kinds of wax and many uses 
for them. Most wax is a blend of animal, mineral, and 



122 



vegetable waxes. Most commercial waxes are made from 
btrswax, palm icax, or paraffin wax. Bees manufacture 
beeswax while building their cells. Palm wax coats the 
leaves of certain palms, such as the carnauba palm in 
Brazil. Paraffin wax is distilled from petroleum. The 
blended waxes, which are solid in their natural state, 
arc mixed into a liquid, called the vehicle, to make 
them easy to apply. The vehicle is usually turpentine 
or some similar stibstance which evaporates in air. The 
surface which is to be waxed is first thoroughly cleaned 
and dried. Then the wax, either in paste or liquid form, 
is applied evenly. The vehicle evaporates, leaving a 
hard coating. W'hen the coating is polished, it has a 
beautiful, mellow sheen. Paste wax, which leaves a 
hard coating, is used to polish furniture. Liquid wax, 
which is easier to apply, is commonly used for Hoors. 

Paraffin tvax is also used to form an airtight covering 
on jars of fruit or vegetables and so protect them from 
harmful bacteria in the air. Many official documents 
bear a wax seal. 

Spermaceti, a wa.\ which comes from the oil of the 
sperm whale, is used in toilet creams. Wool wax, from 
the oil glands of the sheep, is used as a dressing for 
leather goods. Bayberry candles are made from the wa.x 
which covers the berries of the candleberry or wax 

myTtle. George R. Greenbank 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Bayberry Carnauba Wax Sealing Wax 

Beeswax Paraffin Spermaceti 

Candleberry Polish 

WAX MYRTLE is a large evergreen shrub or small tree 
found along the eastern coast of the United States, and 
as far \vest as Texas. It grows as high as 40 feet, and has 
gray flowers. The two- to three-inch leaves are alternate 
along the branches. The wax myrtle is grown as an or- 
namental shrub and does best in damp soil. 

Scientific Classification. Wax myrtles belong to the 
sweet gale family, Myncaceae. They arc classified as genus 
Myrica, species M. cerijera. willi.\m m. harlow 

WAXBERRY. See Candleberry. 

WAXWING is a silky-feathered, grayish-brown bird 
larger than a sparrow, with a conspicuous crest or top- 
knot. It has a band of yellow across the end of its tail, 
and red, waxlike drops on its wing feathers. 

The cedar waxu'ing is the best known of these birds. It 
lives in most parts of North America, as far north as 
central Canada and Labrador. These birds eat berries 
and fruits, and insects. They build bulky nests, usually 
in a fruit or shade tree. Many cedar waxwings are found 
on the islands of Lake .Superior and aroimd the lakes of 
Ontario and northern Minnesota in the summer. The 
birds cannot sing, but are able to utter a few high hissing 
notes. The female lays three to five eggs which are a pale 
bluish or purplish gray, speckled with black, brown, or 
purple. 

The Bohemian waxwing is a slightly larger bird. It has 
yellow marks on its wings and reddish-brown undertail 
feathers. It lives in the northern latitudes of the world. 
In the winter it appears in the northwestern and central 
northern United States and northern Europe. 

The Siberian waxwing lives in southeastern Siberia and 
Japan. 

Scientific Classification. Waxwings belong to the family 
Bombycillidae. The cedar waxwing is genus Bomhycilh, 
species B. cedrorum; the Bohemian, B. garrula, and the 




The Cedar Waxwing gets its name from the waxlike tips on its 
wing feathers. This grayish-brown bird lives throughout North 
America. It cannot sing, but it utters a high, hissing note. 

Siberian, H. japonica. Leonard w. wing 

See also Bird (color pictures, Birds' Eggs, Other Bird 
Favorites). 

WAYBILL. See Bill of Lading. 

WAYLAND BAPTIST COLLEGE. See Unix-ersities 
AND Colleges (table), 

WAYLAND THE SMITH is a hero of the old Germanic 
mythology. His tragic story is told in German, English, 
and Scandinavian sources. Wayland, according to the 
Poetic Edda, was a great craftsman and artist (sec Edda). 
A cruel king named Nidud captured him. Wayland 
had been married for nine years to a Valkyrie (woman 
warrior) who had left him (see Valkyrie). While he 
waited for her return, he made a priceless treasure of 
gold rings. But Nidud stole Wayland's treasure and 
forced the smith to work for him. The king made Way- 
land lame to prevent his escape. Wayland avenged him- 
self by killing the king's sons. He then sent the king or- 
naments made from Nidud's sons' skulls, eyes, and 
teeth. He escaped in a feather dress he had made, after 
he told the king what he had done. Einar Haugen 

WAYNE, ANTHONY (1745-1796), was an American 
officer in the Re\olutionaiy War. He became known as 
"Mad Anthony"' Wayne because of his reckless cour- 
age. He was the hero of the recapture of Stony Point, 
N.Y., a British post on the Hudson River, in 1779. 
Wayne commanded the attack, which was considered 
one of the most daring of the war. 

He was born on Jan. 1, 1745, in Chester County, 
Pennsylvania. He studied at an academy in Philadel- 
phia where he qualified as a surveyor. A Philadelphia 
land company sent him to Nova Scotia in 1765 to 
supervise the surveying and settlement of land. He re- 
turned to Pennsylvania and served in the colonial as- 
sembly. When the war tegan in 1775. he raised a 

123 




Brown Bros. 

"Mad Anthony" Wayne Cheered On His Men as they 
stormed the walls of Stony Point, held by British Redcoats. 

regiment for the Canadian campaign, and later served 
in the garrison at Ticonderoga. In 1777, Wayne became 
a brigadier general and joined Washington's army to 
command the Pennsylvania line. He led a division at 
Brandywine, commanded the right wing at German- 
town, and spent the winter with Washington at \'alley 
Forge. He led the advance attack at Monmouth the 
next year. In 1781, Wayne served with the Marquis de 
Lafayette against General Cornwallis, and took part in 
the siege of Yorktown. Cornwallis' surrender helped 
bring the Revolutionary War to an end. 

In 1783, Wayne became a brevet major general, but 
he retired the same year. He represented Georgia in 
Congress in 1791, but the seat was declared vacant be- 
cause of election irregularities. He returned to the army 
in 1791 as a major general and commander in chief. He 
fought against the Indians in Ohio in 1794, defeating 
them at Fallen Timbers. Wayne made a treaty with the 
Indians in 1795 which secured a great tract of land for 
the United States. Wayne died from gout at Presque 
Isle (now Erie, Pa.) the next year. John r. Alden 

WAYNE STATE UNIVERSITY is a coeducational 
school in Detroit. Once a municipal school, it became 
a state university in 1956. Wayne has colleges and 
schools of liberal arts, education, engineering, medicine, 
pharmacy, law, business administration, and social work, 
and a graduate school. Courees lead to bachelor's, 
master's, and doctor's degrees. The colleges of medicine 
and education trace their beginnings to 1 868. The school 
was organized as Wayne University in 1933. Its name 
became Wayne .State University in 1956. .School colors 
ar-e hunter green and gold. The athletic teams are called 
theTartars.The best-known songs are'-Hymn to Wayne" 
and "Wayne University." For enrollment, see Univer- 
sities AND Colleges (table). Frank x. tuohey 
WAYNESBURG COLLEGE is a coeducational liberal 
arts school at Waynesburg, Pa. It is under Presbyterian 
conu-ol. Courses lead to A.B., B.S., B.S. in Business 
Administration, and B.Ed, degrees. The students assist 
nearby churches with their religious, educational, and 
recreational activities. Waynesburg has a fine collection 
of mineralogical, geological, and Indian archaeological 
specimens. Waynesburg College was chartered in 1850. 
For enrollment, see Universities (table). Paul-r. Stewart 



WAYS AND MEANS COMMITTEE is a powerful 
committee of the United States House of Representa- 
tives. It has jurisdiction over taxation and tariflf legis- 
lation and other important financial matters. 

WAYSIDE INN is the name of the Longfellow shrine 
and colonial museum near Sudbury, Mass. It was built 
in 1686 and was first named the Red Horse Inn. Many 
distinguished guests, such as George Washington and 
the Marquis de Lafayette, stopped there. Henry Wads- 
worth Longfellow's Tales of a Wayside Inn, an imagi- 
nary account of the tales told by the inn's fireside, made 
the place famous. Henry Ford bought the building in 
1923 and partly restored it. Except for a period between 
i860 and 1896, the Wayside Inn served guests con- 
tinuously from the time of its beginning until 1955, 
when it was badly damaged by fire. 

W.C.T.U. See Woman's Christian Temperance 
LInion. 

WEA INDIANS. See Miami Indians. 

WEAKFISH, or SQUETEAGUE, SKWEE teeg, is a salt- 
water food fish of the croaker family. Its name comes 
from the fact that its mouth is tender and easily torn. 
The fish reaches a length of one foot to two feet or more. 
Although sea trout is one of its common names, it is not 
even closely related to the trout. The squeteague lives 
along the eastern and Gulf coasts of the United States 
horn Massachusetts to Texas. The four kinds are the 
common squeteague, the spotted squeteague, the silver sque- 
teague. and the sand squeteague. Weakfish usually weigh 
less than 15 pounds, but they sometimes weigh up to 
30 pounds. 

Scientific Classificaiion. Squeteagues, or sea trout, are 
in tiro family Oiolilhulae. The common squeteague is clas- 
sified as genus Cynoscion, species recalls, and the silver as 
C. nolhus. The spotted squeteague is genus Enscion, species 
nebulosus. &lt;^arl l. hubbs 

See also Fishing (table, GameT'ishing World Records). 

WEALTH is a term referring to material economic 
goods. Possession of goods is one means of sadsfying 
human needs and wants. There are two chief kinds of 
goods— /ree and economic. Free goods, such as air and 
sunshine, exist in abundance and are readily available 
to everyone. Economic goods are those that are scarce 
or difficult to obtain, and people are willing to pay for 
them. 

There are two principal kinds of economic goods— 
consumer goods and capital goods. Capital goods are de- 
scribed in The World Book in the article Capital. 
Consumer goods include durable goods, such as auto- 
mobiles, books, and household furnishings, as well as 
less durable and quickly perishable goods, such as 
clothing and food. 

Wealth (economic goods) has three qualities. lo be 
wealth, an article mus't have utility, that is, the power to 
satisfy wants. It must also be limited in amount. And it 
must be transferable, or material and capable of being 

possessed. 

The production, evaluation, distribution, and con- 
sumption of wealth make up the primary subject matter 
of the science of economics. Leonard c. R. Lanoer 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Consumption Money Savings 

C.redit Price Supply and Demand 

Economics Profit Value 

Interest Rent 



124 



WEAPON, WEHP im. Weapons have played an im- 
portant part in the history of man. Without weapons 
man could not have conquered vast areas of wilderness 
or defended his home and family from enemies. But 
weapons also have played a tragic part in the histoiy of 
civilization. Wars have been made more and more hor- 
rible by the development of new weapons which can 
kill more and more people, and destroy more of the 
worthwhile things man has built in time of peace. 
Today, nuclear power has made possible weapons so 
destructive that many persons feel man no longer has 
positive defenses against his own power to destroy. 
The continued use of such weapons could destroy civ- 
ilization, and man is building moral as well as material 
defenses against them. 

Weapons may be divided roughly into five classes: 
(1) crushing, piercing, or cutting weapons; (2) explosive 
weapons; (3) chemical weapons; (4) bacteriological 
weapons; and (5) nuclear weapons. 

Clmshing, piercing, and cutting weapons were among 
the earliest devised by man. The first weapons probably 
were rocks which early men used to kill prehistoric 
animals. Piercing weapons progressed from the early 
flint knives to the modern bayonet. 

Explosive weapons developed in the 1300's, when 
gunpowder was used in hand guns and cannons. The 
ancient Greeks, who developed Greek fire, first used 
chemical weapons. Chemical weapons such as the 
flame thrower became important in modern warfare. 
Bacteriological weapons, using germs to spread disease 
among militaiy and civilian groups, have been used 
only rarely in modern warfare. 

Nuclear weapons are the greatest threat to mankind, 
because their destaictive power is so enormous. By the 
1960's, nuclear weapons could be launched by aircraft, 
submarines, and ballistic missiles. John d. Bilunosley 

Related Articles in World Book include: 



Atomic Bomb 

Bomb 

BuUet 

Cartridge 

Cordite 

Depth Charge 

Detonator 

Forcite 



Artillery 

Bazooka 

Blunderbuss 

Cannon 

Carbine 

Firearm 



Ax 

Bayonet 

Blowgun 

Boomerang 

Bowie Knife 

Catapult 



Ammunition 

Archery 

Arrowhead 

Arsenal 

Ballistics 



Explosives 
Fragmentation 
Fuse 
Grenade 
Guncotton 
Gunpowder 
Hydrogen Bomb 
Mine, Military 



Firearms 
Flintlock 
Garand Rifle 
Gun 

Harquebus 
Howitzer 
Machine Gun 

Other Weapons 

Crossbow 

Dagger 

Flame Thrower 

Guided Missile 

Knife 

Machete 

Unclassified 

Biological 
Warfare 
Chemical Warfare 
Disarmament 
Fire Control 



Nitroglycerin 

PETN 

Plastic Bomb 

RDX 

Shrapnel 

TNT 

Torpedo 



Mortar 

Musket 

Pistol 

Revolver 

Rifle 

Shotgun 



Rocket 

Sling 

Spear 

Sword 

Tomahawk 

Ulu 



Greek Fire 
Magazine 
Ordnance 
Powder Horn 
Shot Tower 



WEASEL 

WEARE, MESHECH. See New Hampshire (History). 

WEASEL, ]\'EE zh is a small furry animal whose 
white winter coat gives us the fur called ermine. Any 
weasel in its winter coat may be called an ermine, but 
some do not have such fine fur as others. Some weasels 
that live in the southern part of the United States do 
not turn white in winter. The weasel family also includes 
martens, badgers, skunks, and otters. 

Weasels belong to the carnivorous (flesh-eating) ani- 
mal group. They have keen sight and smell, and are 
good hunters. Weasels sometimes kill farm poultry. But 
they can also be useful when they destroy troublesome 
pests. Weasels have a strong, unpleasant odor. These 
slim animals move swiftly. 

The long-tailed weasel is the best-known kind in North 
America. It has a white belly and dark-brown back, 
with a black tip on its tail. The female of this weasel is 
about 1 3 inches long. The male long-tailed weasel grows 
about 16 inches long. 

The short-tailed weasel is smaller than the long-tailed 
weasel. The male averages 1 1 inches in length and the 
female averages 9 inches. The tail is about 2 inches 
long. The short-tailed weasel produces most of North 
America's ermine. It lives in many parts of the United 
.States and Canada. 

The least weasel also lives in North America. It is the 
smallest known carnivorous animal. The male is 8 
inches long and the female is 6 inches long. 

Scientific Classification. Weasels belong to the family 
Mustelidae. The long-tailed weasel is genus Alustela, species 
M. frenata. The short-tailed weasel is M. erminea, and the 
least weasel is M, rixosa. Harold e. Anthony 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Badger Marten Polecat 



Ermine 
Ferret 



Mink 
Otter 



Ratel 
Sable 



.Skunk 
Tayra 
Wolverine 



The Dwarf Plains Weasel, fop, is changing from its white 
ermine winter coat to its dari&lt;er summer fur. The weasel, boftom, 
has completed changing from winter to summer colors. 

Ernest P. Walker 





WEATHER includes all the daily changes in tempera- 
ture, wind, moisture, and air pressure. It affects every- 
one. Today's weather may make us feel hot or cold. 
We may get soaking wet in a sudden shower, or have to 
struggle through deep snow. Bright sunshine may make 
the day cheerful and happy. Dark, dull clouds may 
make us sad and unhappy. Too much rain can cause 
floods. Too little rain may kill farm crops. 

We cannot change the weather very much at present, 
but we can adjust ourselves to it. We put on raincoats 
when it rains, and boots when it snows. We heat our 
homes in cold weather and cool them in hot weather. 
Weather plays an important part in many human 
activities. Farmers need good weather so that their crops 
will grow and ripen. Storms or sudden frosts can destroy 
valuable crops. This raises the prices we pay for food at 
our neighborhood stores. Weather even affects sales in 
department stores. Fewer persons shop in rainy or snowy 
weather. Transportation and communication also suffer 
in bad weather. Snow may make trains late. Fog often 
prevents airplanes from taking off. Icy highways slow 
automobile and truck traffic. Storms can break tele- 
phone and electric-power lines. Ships at sea often have 
to change their courses to avoid bad weather. In war- 
time, weather plays an important part in planning 
military operations. During World War II, a storm over 
the English Channel delayed the Allied invasion of 
France for a day. 

Weather forecasting helps us fit our plans to future 
weather. We can hear weather forecasts on the radio, 



"Will If Snow Tomorrow?" and other questions about weather 
conditions are answered in the weather reports on radio and tele- 
vision and in newspapers. TV forecasters show simplified versions 
of the complex weather maps prepared by the Weather Bureau. 



watch them on television, and read them in the news- 
paper. Meteorologists, the scientists who study weather, 
gather information about weather conditions and pre- 
dict what the weather will be tomorrow, next week, or 
even next month. The weatherman's forecasts may save 
thousands of lives and millions of dollars in property. 
Forecasters warn fruitgrowers of early frosts and give 
them time to set out smudge pots. Ranchers who learn 
of storms in advance have a chance to shelter their 
cattle. Weathermen track destructive hurricanes and 
tell people when to expect floods. They also help fam- 
ilies plan picnics, vacations, and other activities. 

Weather is not the same as climate. Climate is a sum- 
mary of weather conditions in a certain region for a 
period of many years. Climate is based on average tem- 
peratures, average amounts of rain and snow, and aver- 
ages of sunshine, wind, and humidity. See Climate. 

Weather Forecasting 

Weather forecasts depend on observations made at 
weather stations throughout the world. Forecasters 
analyze the information and base their predictions on 
the patterns that highs, lows, and other weather ele- 
ments usually follow. But weather systems do not always 
act in the same way, and no two weather situations are 



126 




TEMPERATURE 



Wide World; Yugoslav Info. Center; Gendreau 

exactly alike. Weather processes are much too com- 
plicated, too rapidly changing, and too different in 
places near each other for perfect forecasting. A forecast 
for a short time ahead may be highly accurate. But for 
longer and longer times ahead, the forecast is less and 
less accurate. A forecast made for a month ahead may 
be little more than a guess. 

Observations. A weatherman can forecast future 
weather only if he knows present and past conditions. 
But if a forecaster knows the conditions only for his o\vn 
area, he cannot forecast weather for more than a few 
hours ahead. For a longer forecast, he must know the 
present and recent weather over a much larger region. 
Weather conditions affecting the United States and 
Canada as yqu read this article began a week ago over 
the oceans and other countries. Generally, the farther 
ahead a forecaster predicts weather, the larger the area 
for which he must know the present weather. 

Observers record the weather conditions at weather 
stations in alj parts of the United States. They report 
air pressure, temperature, humidity, wind speed and 
direction, cloud forms, amounts of rain and snow, and 
such obstiTJCtions to visibility as fog, haze, and smoke. 
Airplane pilots report the weather by radio. Radar 
operators observe and report clouds and precipitation 
more than 200 miles away (see Rad.\r [AVeather]). 
Crew members on ships at sea report the weather con- 
ditions in various parts of the ocean. All these observers 
code their information in condensed form and transmit 
it by radio and teletype to United States Weather 



WEATHER 

Bureau forecast centers throughout the country. The 
Weather Bureau exchanges weather reports with the 
Canadian Meteorological Sei-vice. The bureau also 
receives about 2,500 weather reports every day from 
other countries. It sends out about the same number of 
reports on American weather conditions. All weather 
observations are transmitted to the National Weather 
Analysis Center near Washington, D.C. See Weather 
Bureau, United States. 

Analysis. As weather information pours into the 
analysis center, experts called plotters decode the mes- 
sages. They record the observations from each weather 
observer on maps, using numbers and symbols. Analysts 
draw isobars, or lines connecting places that have the 
same air pressure. Then they draw isotherms, or lines 
connecting places with the same temperature. Other 
lines show the locations of cold and warm fronts between 
air masses. These analyzed maps are copied and sent 
over facsimile networks (see Facsimile). Facsimile re- 
corders reproduce the maps at hundreds of weather 
stations throughout the United States. 

Forecast centers that receive weather obsei-vations by 
teletype also plot weather maps. But smaller Weather 
Bureau offices do not. They prepare their forecasts from 
the maps sent out by the analysis center. 

In order to predict the weather, a forecaster first 
studies the analyzed maps. Like blueprints, these maps 
give him a three-dimensional picture of the weather 
systems. He knows how these systems — highs, lows, air 
masses, and fronts — normally develop and move. He 
can quickly predict what to expect. But weather systems 
do not always behave normally. So the forecaster com- 
pares the new maps with earlier ones. He learns how 
the motion and development of the systems differ from 
their normal behavior. If past maps show that the 
present weather system is not moving normally, the 
forecaster must determine whether it probably will con- 



WEATHER TERMS 



Air Mass is a large body of air that has about the same 
weather conditions throughout it. Air masses may be 
warm or cold, dry or humid. 

Front is a long, narrow band of changing weather 
between two kinds of air masses. 

High, or Anticyclone, is a large area of high pressure. 
In the Northern Hemisphere, winds blow clockwise in 
a high. They blow counterclockwise in the Southern 
Hemisphere. 

Humidity is the amount of moisture, or water vapor, 
in the air. 

low, or Cyclone, is a large area of low pressure. 
Winds in a low rotate counterclockwise in the Northern 
Hemisphere. They rotate clockwise in the Southern 
Hemisphere. 

Precipitation is water droplets or ice crystals that fall 
to earth as rain, snow, sleet, or hail. 

Pressure is tlie force produced by the weight of air 
pressing down on the earth. 

Temperature measures the degree of heat in the air. 

Tornado is the smallest, most violent kind of destructive 
storm. The dark, funnel-shaped cloud that extends to the 
ground is usually only about 300 yards across. Its twist- 
ing winds may whirl 300 miles an hour. 

Wind is the movement of masses of air. Winds are 
named by the direction from which they blow. For 
example, a south wind blows from south to north. 



127 



It* 

I ??•*" 




WEATHER FORECASTING 

Making accurate weather reports requires the work of many dif- 
ferent people. The forecaster needs accurate observations of the 
past and present weather conditions in many places on earth. 



First Federal Savings of Chicago 



linue to move in the same way, or will begin to move 
in a more nearly normal manner. 

Finally, the forecaster examines the details of the 
maps. He notices little things that may seem unimpor- 
tant, such as a slight increase of cloudiness or a small 
change in the shape of a front. These details may 
indicate important trends, such as increasing precipita- 
tion or a new area of falling pressure. 

Now the forecaster draws a number of prognostic 
charts that show his predictions of the weather. The 
prognostic charts prepared in the analysis center are 
transmitted immediately by facsimile to the local 
Weather Bureau offices. Local weathermen interpret 
these maps for their areas. Then they send local fore- 
casts to newspapers and radio and television stations. 
The electronic computer has taken some of the bur- 
den of decision from the forecaster. Since May, 1955, 
computers have been used to help make some of the 
weather forecasts. They can predict certain basic ele- 
ments of future weather. Computers can even analyze 
weather maps. As meteorologists learn more about the 
patterns of weather and their variations, computers can 
make even better forecasts. 

Kinds of Forecasts. Weathermen use different meth- 
ods to make forecasts for various lengths of time. The 
differences consist mainly in the kind of maps used and 
the details given in the forecasts. 

Short-Range Forecasts (up to one or two days ahead) 
are based mainly on daily weather charts. Local fore- 
casters in Weather Bureau offices throughout the United 
States prepare and distribute them to the public. They 
continually revise them as they get new information. 
Extended Forecasts are made by the Weather Bureau's 
long-range forecast center in Washington. These fore- 
casts cover periods of 5 days and 30 days. Forecasters 
prepare 5-day forecasts based on charts showing the 
average conditions over a 5-day period. They prepare 
new 5-dav forecasts three times every week. Twice each 



OMAHA, NEB. 






xn 



w" 



^^ 



'tj^- 



i} 



'.-^ 



Si 



\ ,.■ 



\J 



Observers at weather stations record information about weather 
conditions in their areas. They code the information and flash it by 
teletype to Weather Bureau offices throughout the United States. 



month, on about the 1st and the 15th, the forecast 
center releases 30-day forecasts giving the average 
weather conditions expected for the next 30 days. They 
base these forecasts on 30-day average charts. The longer 
the period covered by the forecasts, the fewer details 
they include. A forecaster may predict rain for tomorrow 
afternoon, but he will be less certain about the time 
rain may fall five days from now. A 30-day forecast pre- 
dicts whether the amount of rainfall over the whole 
period will be above or below normal. 

The Story of a Storm 

One of the important services performed by weather 
forecasters is tracking major storms and predicting 
where they will strike. Here is the story of the birth, life, 
and death of a typical storm that demonstrates how 
weather forecasters work. 

Birth of a Storm. A small area of thunderstorms, the 
first sign that a major storm is forming, appears on a 
September day over the Adantic Ocean west of the 
Cape Verde Islands. During the next two or three days, 
the area of thunderstorms increases and the air pressure 
slowly falls. Then a definite center of low pressure forms, 
and winds begin to whid around it. A tropical cyclone 
is born. While winds carry the new storm westward, it 
grows in size and strength. 

Tracl&lt;ing a Storm. No one has yet seen the storm. 
But forecasters in the Weather Bureau's Hurricane 
Warning Service at Miami, Fla., become suspicious. 
Their charts show a trough (low-pressure area) in the 
middle of the tropical Atlantic. They know hurricanes 
often '"hide" in such troughs. They keep close watch, 
hoping a ship in the area will radio a weather report. 
Fortunately, a weather satellite passing over the area 
transmits a picture showing the spiral cloud bands of 
a hurricane. Finally, a ship's observer reports unusu- 
ally low air pressure, strong winds, and squalls. The 
forecasters feel sure that the storm is a hurricane. They 



128 




Weather Bureau Offices receive reports sent in 
by observers over teletype circuits. Meteorologists 
read the coded reports and decode the messages. 

consult the year's list of names, and christen it "Hannah." 
Each vear, weathermen make up an alphabetical list 
of girls' names, which they give to hurricanes as the\- 
appear. The letter "H" for '"Hannah" tells that this is 
the eighth hurricane of the year. 

United States Air Force and Naw pilots, called 
hurricane hunters, fly out to examine the storm and track 
its position. They look at the ocean waves, the spiral 
bands of clouds, and the central eye. The eye is a 
region of relative calm and nearly clear skies in the 
center of the storm. It is about 20 miles in diameter. The 
hurricane hunters drop radiosondes into the storm. Radio- 
sondes are instruments carried by balloons or dropped 
from planes by dropsondes, or parachutes. The instm- 
ments measure temperature, air pressure, and humidil\-. 
The ]3ilots estiinate the strength of the winds, and report 
iheir observations to the hurricane-waming center. 

Forecasters analyze the reports from the hurricane 
hunters, and learn that Hannah's center is about 800 
miles east of Puerto Rico. The storm is moving westward 
at 15 miles an hour. Its winds are rotating 100 miles an 
hour around the calm eye. If the hurricane stays on its 
course, it will reach Puerto Rico in two days. The fore- 
casters issue a hurricane watch announcement to the 
islanders. This announcement tells them that a hurri- 
cane is near and that they should be ready to protect 
themselves if a hurricane warning is issued. 

During the next two days, Hannah's coiu-se veers 
toward the west-northwest, so Puerto Rico does not 
receive the worst part of the storm. Now the forecasters 
must predict if and when Hannah will strike the main- 
land of the United States. 

The storm is beginning to follow the typical curving 
path toward north and then toward northeast. It might 
cross the coast anywhere from Florida northward. Or it 
could curve far to the northeast and iniss the mainland 
entirelw The forecasters study their maps of surface and 
upper air. They decide that air movement will steer 



Plotters record the information from eoch weather station on a 
large map. They draw stofion models, or groups of numbers and 
symbols that represent weather information for each station. 

The Station Model for Omaha, Neb., shows wind, temper- 
ature, pressure, dev^ point, and cloud conditions for that city. 



Wind Speed and Direction- 
north at 1 5 to 20 miles an hour. 

i 
I Barometric Pressure reduced 

Temperature-49°F. \- ,^ ^^^ level- 1025.4 millibars. 




OMAHA, NEB 



Dew Point — 36°F. 



Pressure Change during the 
lost three hours — up 6 1 milli- 
bars by rising fairly steadily. 



Cloud Cover — about one fourth 
of the sky covered by clouds. 



Forecasters analyze the completed map. They note the main 
weather systems and their positions. They refer to older mops to 
see how the systems are moving. Then they make their forecasts. 



01 (^ 





I0!0 



1024 



A Weather Map pictures weather conditions in various parts of 
the country. This map of a mid-April day shows cloudy weather in 
the East, rain in the Middle West, and clear skies in the Southwest. 



Weather Map Prepared by Mtirray &amp; Trettel, Consulting Meteorologists 

The squall line centers on on area that has gusty winds and fre- 
quent rain. Wavy isobars connect places that have the same air 
pressure, as indicated by the numbers on the lines. 



WEATHER MAP SYMBOLS 



Cold Front Warm Front 


Stationary Front 


Squall Line 


Isobar 


Precipitation 


Cloud Cover is the portion O 
of the sky covered by clouds. Clear 


3 

One Quarter 


One Half 


Three Quarters 


• 

Completely Overcast 



Wind. The "feathers" show speed in mph. The 
end of the arrow with the "feathers" points 
in the direction from which the wind is blowing. 



Calm 



26-31 32-37 38-43 44-49 




o — ^ 

50-54 



55-60 



61-66 



67-71 



o — n 

21-25 
72-77 



t.-S&gt; 



THE EFFECT OF AIR PRESSURE ON THE WEATHER 




1024 



loze 



TULSA, OK LA. 



996 lOOD ,(j04 
CHICAGO, ILL. 



1006 



mz 



The Ocean of Air that presses down on the earth affects the 
weather. Air pressure varies from place to place. A high, or area 
of high pressure, resembles a mountain of air. It rises above sur- 
rounding air masses. It is heavier than the air around it. Winds in 
a high spiral ouiward ond downward, causing clouds to evap- 



orate. Highs usually bring fair weather. A low, or area of low 
pressure, resembles a valley. It weighs less than surrounding air 
mosses. Winds in a low spiral inward, and force the air In the 
center to rise. As the air rises, it cools, and may condense to form 
clouds, fog, or rain. Lows often bring wet, stormy weather. 



COLD FRONT 




■*" CUMULONIMBUS ,j« 



CIRRUS 



VARM AIR 




A Cold Front forms when a cold air mass forces its 
way underneath a warmer air mass, and pushes the 
worm air upward. As the front moves along in the 



WARM FRONT 



WARM AIR 



NIMBOSTRATUS 



direction shown by the blacl&lt; arrows, cold air replaces 
warmer air. A narrow zone of clouds forms at the 
front, and violent rainstorms often rage along if. 



CIRRUS 




Cs^fngm CI Rind MCrvam &amp; Co 



A Warm Front forms when a mass of warm air over- 
takes, and moves on top of, a mass of colder air. 
Warm air replaces the colder air as the front moves 



in the direction shown by the black arrows. Clouds, 
steady rain or snow, and sometimes thunderstorms, 
form within a fairly wide zone ahead of a warm front. 




U.S. Weather Bureau 

Funnel-Shaped Cloud of a tornado contains winds 
that whirl about its center at over 300 miles per hour. 



HURRICANE 



Tornadoes usually form along a cold front. As the front moves, some cold 
air may jut forward from the front and rise above the warm, moist air. The 
cold air aloft and the warm air combine to form a whirling tornado funnel. 




U.S. Weather Bureau 

Destructive Power of a Hurricane is increased 
by huge waves that lash coastal areas as it passes. 



A Hurricane has high winds that whirl around a low-pressure center. Hurri- 
canes that affect the United States start in the tropical parts of the North 
Atlantic Ocean. They usually travel northward in a curving path. 



WEATHER 

Hannah toward the coast of North Carolina. But they 
cannot be sure, so they issue a hurricane watch for the 
coast from Florida to Virginia. 

Meanwhile, hurricane hunters make regular flights 
into the storm to record its position, course, and inten- 
sity. They find that it is beginning to move northwest 
at 20 miles an hour. The next day, its center is about 
500 miles south of Cape Hatteras and it is moving 
directly north at 22 miles an hour. The forecasters warn 
residents along the coast from South Carolina to Dela- 
ware to protect themselves and their property. They tell 
the people to move inland, away from the low coastal 
areas where the storm's winds will build up a high tide. 
Shortly before the storm hits the coast, they issue hurri- 
cane warnings to areas in Hannah's path. 

Effects of a Storm. Finally, hurricane Hannah rips 
into the coastal area. It uproots trees and telephone 
poles, leaving many towns without light or communica- 
tion. The 1 00-mile-an-hour winds tear the roofs off 
houses and break windows left uncovered by careless 
homeowners. The rains that accompany the hurricane 
bring floods to small rivers and creeks. The storm raises 
the tide so that it carries some boats inland and dumps 
them on dry land. The storm tide drowns a number of 
coastal dwellers who have not left their homes for 
higher land. The water ruins the homes and belongings 
of many other families. 

Leaving behind wreckage, water, and fallen trees, 
the storm curves to the northeast. It moves into tlie busy 
shipping lanes of the North Atlantic. In a final burst of 
fury, Hannah tosses up waves as high as 50 feet, produc- 
ing seasickness and injuries for passengers on battered 
ships. Then the storm moves farther northeastward, los- 
ing its identity in an area of low pressure near Iceland. 

What Makes Up Weather? 

Weather changes constantly. One day may be dry 
and sunny, and the next day cloudy and rainy. The 
main elements that make up the weather are: (1) tem- 
perature, (2) wind, (3) moisture, and (4) air pressure. 

Temperature afTects the weather more than anything 
else. The sun sends huge amounts of energy into space. 
Some of this energy, or sunshine, reaches the earth. The 
atmosphere, the clouds, and the surface of the earth 
reflect some of it back into space. The rest is absorbed 
by the atmosphere and earth and changed into heat. 
This heat warms the earth and the atmosphere. 

The atmosphere traps sunshine much as a greenhouse 
does. Sunshine is radiation in the form of short waves. 
Short waves pass easily through the glass panes of a 
greenhouse. Plants in the greenhouse absorb some of 
the sunshine and change it into heat. The plants then 
radiate the heat in the form of long waves. Long waves 
cannot pass easily through the glass panes, so they 
remain in the greenhouse and keep it warm. The atmos- 
phere acts as do the glass panes in the greenhouse. It lets 
in short-wave sunshine, but traps the long heat waves. 
See Radiation (How Radiation Affects Life on Earth). 

Thermometers measure the temperature of the air. 
To find the correct air temperature, place a thermometer 
in a shady spot. A thermometer placed in the sun will 
show a higher temperature than the actual temperature 
of the air. Direct sun heats the glass and mercury -in the 

132 



thermometer more than it heats the air. See Tempera- 
ture; Thermometer. 

Wind is the movement of air over the surface of the 
earth. Winds rank as an important factor in weather 
conditions. A soft breeze may make a summer day more 
pleasant. A violent windstorm may bring injuries and 
destruction to people and property in its path. Wind is 
also important because it moves the other elements of 
weather from one place to another. A wind from the 
north may bring low temperatures. A sea breeze carries 
cool, moist air over the land. Weather vanes and ane- 
mometers supply accurate information on the direction 
and speed of the wind. These devices usually record the 
information automatically. See Wind. 

Weather vanes are instruments that indicate the direc- 
tion of the wind. Winds receive their names from the 
direction /roOT which they blow. The arrow on a weather 
vane points to the direction from which the wind is 
blowing. See Weather Vane. 

Meteorologists use anemometers to find the speed of 
the wind. An anemometer has long spokes with cups 
attached to them. The wind makes the cups whirl 
around. Meteorologists can calculate wind speed from 
the speed at which the cups move. In the United States, 
wind speed is stated in miles per hour, or in knots (one 
knot equals 1.15 miles per hour). See Anemometer. 

Moisture affects the weather in several ways. It may 
fall to earth as one of the forms of precipitation — rain, 
snow, hail, or sleet. Or it may remain in the atmosphere 
as humidity, or water vapor. Water vapor in the atmos- 
phere may condense to form tiny droplets of water or 
ice crystals that do not fall to earth. If the droplets or 
crystals condense high above the earth, they form clouds. 
If they are near the surface of the earth, they form fog. 
See Cloud; Fog; Rain; Snow. 

Meteorologists use several kinds of hygrometers to 
measure the amount of water vapor in the air. One kind, 
called a psychrometer, consists of two thermometers set 
on a support so they can be whirled in the air. The 
bulb of one thermometer is covered with a wet cloth. 
It is called a wet-bulb thermometer. The other is a dry- 
bulb thermometer. When the two are whirled in the air 
for a few minutes, water evaporates from the wet cloth 
and cools the wet-bulb thermometer. The amount of 
evaporation depends on the amount of moisture in the 
air. In dry air, more evaporation takes place. The diflfer- 
ence between the temperatures of the two thermometers 
measures moisture in the air. Humidity is calculated 
from this difference. See Humidity; Hygrometer. 

Meteorologists use a cylindrical instrument called a 
raingauge to measure rainfall. The inches of rainfall can 
be calculated by measuring the amount that drops into 
a long, narrow tube inside the gauge. Snowfall may also 
be measured with a rain gauge. Snow that falls into the 
tube may be melted and measured as rain. Or it may be 
weighed. Then meteorologists calculate the number of 
inches of melted snow. Some snow is heavier than other 
snow. A 6-inch layer of moist snow or a 30-inch layer of 
dry snow equals about 1 inch of rain. See Rain Gauge. 

Air Pressure, or the weight of air pushing on the 
earth, varies from time to time and from place to place. 
Meteorologists do not know all the reasons for these 
differences in air pressure around the earth. But they do 
know that variations in temperature cause some of the 
pressure differences. Warm air weighs less than cold air. 



It exerts less pressure on the earth and creates an area of 
low- pressure. Cold air. which is heavier, creates an area 
of high pressure. See Air (Weight and Pressure). 

Weathermen call large low-pressure areas lows or 
cyclones. Large areas of high pressure are called highs or 
antuychnes. Air generally moves from a high-pressure 
area into a low-pressure area. In the same way, winds 
blow out of a high and into a low. 

Highs usually bring fair weather. The air in the 
center settles downward, and is compressed. This com- 
pression heats the air and evaporates clouds. Lows 
generally bring cloudy or stonny \veather. .\ir currents 
in lo\\s move upward, and the air cools. Clouds often 
form in the cooling air. 

Barometers show the air pressure. A mercury barometer 
is a long glass tube with its open end in a cup of mercurs'. 
As the air pressure changes, so does the height to which 
the mercurs- rises in the tube. The scale on a barometer 
mav be marked in inches, in millimeters, or in millibars, 
a special scale for measuring pressure. A millibar is 
rrwBV of a bar, which is a pressure of 29.53 inches of 
mercury at sea level. To obtain an accurate measure- 
ment, the reading on a barometer must be corrected for 
variations in altitude, temperature, and gravity differ- 
ences at different latitudes. 

Aneroid barometers record changes in pressure by using 
an airtight box. Most of the air is removed from the box. 
The metal surfaces of the box move in or out as air 
pressure increases or decreases. These changes control a 
pointer on a dial. .Aneroid barometer readings do not 
need corrections for temperature and gravity differences. 
See B.\ROME-rER. 

Weather Patterns 

Weather conditions move from one place to another. 
A storm that starts in Canada can bring snow- and 
freezing temperatures to the Midwestern United States. 
A hurricane that develops in the Caribbean Sea can 
destro\' homes on the New England coast. As meteorolo- 
gists learn more about the patterns and movement of 
weather, thc\- can impro\-e their forecasts. 

Temperature Patterns. The angle at w-hich the sun's 
rays strike the earth afl'ects the temperature in different 
areas. Sunshine strikes the earth at almost a right angle 
(90°) near the equator, and at acute angles in polar 
regions. This causes the difference in temperature be- 
tween the equator and the poles. 

The changing angle of the sun's rays also causes the 
changing seasons. In winter, the sun is low in the sky. 
Sunshine must pass through more atmosphere when the 
sun is low. Much of it is absorbed or scattered back to 
space, never reaching the earth's surface. The sunshine 
that does reach the earth is spread over a larger area. 
It cannot heat the earth as well as sunshine that strikes 
at almost a right angle. In summer or at lower latitudes, 
the sunshine strikes the earth at higher angles. The 
energy of the sun's rays is not absorbed, scattered, or 
spread out as much. See Se.^son. 

A flashlight can help you understand how the angle 
of the sun's rays affects the amount of energ\- the earth 
receives. If you shine a flashlight beam straight down 
on a piece of paper, the light will be concentrated in a 
circle. If you hold it at an angle, the light will spread 
out and not be so strong. 

A 12-inch ruler and a jar of water can show \ou how 



WEATHER 

the angle of the sun's rays affects the amount of atmos- 
phere they pass through. If you stand the ruler straight 
down in six inches of water, only half of it becomes wet. 
But if you put the ruler in the water at an angle, the 
water will reach higher up on the stick. This shows that 
the slanting ruler has passed through more water. 

Air Movement. The earth would become hotter and 
hotter if the atmosphere could not get rid of stored-up 
heat. Winds carr&gt;- excess heat from the equator to the 
cold polar regions. 

The warm air at the equator weighs less than the 
cooler air farther north or south. Because of this, a 
perrnanent low-pressure area forms around the earth 
near the equator. This area is called the equatorial low. 
The cold air at the poles sinks to the earth, creating 
areas of polar highs. The heavier air from the polar highs 
moves toward the equator. It pushes underneath the 
warm air, and forces it upward into the upper atmos- 
phere. The warm air, now in the upper atmosphere, 
moves toward the poles. This movement of air from the 
poles to the equatorand backagain goes on continuously. 
Cold air becomes warm as it reaches the equator. It is 
then forced upward by more cold air, and begins moving 
toward the poles. 

However, air masses do not move directly north or 
directly south. The rotation of the earth creates a force 
called the Coriolis force. This force pushes air currents to 
the right of the direction the\- are moving in the North- 
ern Hemisphere, and to the left in the Southern Hemi- 
sphere. By experimenting with a globe, you can see how 
the Coriolis force causes the winds to change directions. 
Spin the globe in the same direction as the earth turns 
(to the right). While the globe spins, draw a chalk line 
directly down from the North Pole toward the South 
Pole. When you stop the globe, you will not see a 
straight line. You will see a curve that comes toward the 
equator and crosses it at an angle. The chalk line looks 
as if it had been draw-n from the northeast toward the 
southwest. See Coriolis Force. 

Because of the Coriolis force, the hea-vy air at the 
earth's surface pushing toward the equatorial low does 
not blow directly from the north in the Northern Hemi- 
sphere. It blows from the northeast. In the Southern 
Hemisphere it blows froin the southeast. These north- 
east and southeast winds are called trade winds (see 
Trade Wind). 

Scientists do not clearly understand why the exchange 
of air between the equator and the poles is not so simple 
as they might expect. The air mass traveling in the 
upper atmosphere from the equator toward the poles 
begins to sink near 30° latitude. .\s the air drops, it 
spreads out. Some of it returns toward the equator. The 
rest moves along the earth's surface toward the poles. 
This subtropical region (near 30° latitude) has a belt of 
high pressure around the earth. 

The air that drops to earth and continues moving 
toNvard the poles begins to change its direction. In the 
Northern Hemisphere, the rotation of the earth changes 
it from a south wind to a southwest or nearly westerly 
wind. The winds in this region are called prevailing 
ivesterlies (see Prevailing \Vesterlv). Farther north, 
these polebound air masses meet the cold, heav\' air of 
the polar region. The warm, light westerlies rise above 

132a 




The Hurricane Generator. A real hurri- 
cane begins when the sun heats the ocean, pro- 
ducing a rising cloud of warm, moist air. In the 
hurricane generator, a cloud of water vopor is 
formed by heating water in a pan. Cool air 
enters ot the sides of the generator, forcing the 
cloud to twist upward like a real hurricone. 



Cool Air 



'■^., 




A WORLD BOOK SCIENCE PROJECT 

A HOMEMADE HURRICANE 

The purpose of this project is to show how hurricanes form 
and to demonstrate how the winds of a hurricane spin in 
different directions in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. 

MATERIALS AND ASSEMBLY 

You con buy all the materials you need for this project at a hardware store. 
To build the hurricane generator, first assemble the wooden boxes that serve 
as the top and bottom. Then attach the corner metal angles to the bottom box, 
insert the glass and Masonite walls, and attach the upper box and stovepipe. 
The inside of the top box should be pointed white to reflect light and 
heat. The rest of the ports of the hurricane generator are painted black. 




Light bulb (25 watt) 



The Upper Box is built of ^^-inch plywood side pieces ond a %-Inch 
plywood top piece. Cut a 6-inch hole in the top for the stovepipe. Cut a 
1 -inch hole tn one side and screw the electrical box over the hole. Fasten 
half-rounds on the inside and outside edges of the bottom of the box. The 
half-rounds serve as guides for sliding the pieces of gloss and the Masonite. 



The Lower Box is olso built of ^/^-inch and Ve-inch plywood. Cut a 1 2-inch 
hole in the top and drill seven 'A-inch ventilating holes near the top of any 
two facing sides. Fasten seven half-rounds to the edges of the top of the box. 
One side should have only on inside half-round so that the Masonite wall can 
be pulled out easily. You con moke legs by nailing strap iron pieces across 
each corner. Drill a ys-inch hole in each piece and use Ve-inch bolts as legs. 



The Direction of Spin is controlled by slid- 
ing the gloss panels to the left or right, A 
Northern Hemisphere hurricane, above, twists 
counterclockwise. A Southern Hemisphere hurri- 
cane, below, twists upward in o clockwise way. 



Water Vapor 



Cooi Air 





Half-rounds 



Ventilating holes 





The Completed Generofor is assembled using four 2-foot 
sections of 1 -inch angle iron. Attach the angle irons to the bottom 
box, insert the gloss and Masonite side pieces, and attach the upper 
box. The glass and Masonite should meosure 1 4 inches by 20 inches. 
You con attach two drawer pulls to the piece of Masonite to make it 
easier to handle. Attach the stovepipe to the top with angle braces. 



1-in. angle iron 

Double-weight glass (14 in. X 20 in.) 

Masonite (M in. X 20 in.) 



lUuslraled by Belte Davis for WORLD BOOK 

To Start the Generotor, take the Masonite wall oft the appa- 
ratus and place a pie pan in the lower box. Fill the pan with water 
and put the Masonite wall bock on. Slide the gloss and Masonite 
walls to the left. Put the hot plate beneath the generator and turn 
it on tvlote the twisting action of the cloud of water vapor. Then 
move the walls to the right to reverse the direction of the twisting. 



Electric hot plate (600 to 1 100 watt) 





ANEMOMETER 



THERMOMETER 



Students Learn to Use Weather Instruments 

to find out the exact weather conditions. Then they can 
try to make weather predictions for the next few days. 



Weather Instruments. A weather vane shows the wind's direction, and on 
onemometer shows its speed. A psychrometer measures the dampness of the 
air, and a barograph records its pressure. A thermometer indicates temperature. 



the polar air. The boundary between the warm air mass 
and the cold air mass is called the polar front. The wester- 
lies become quite strong about six or seven miles above 
the ground over the polar front. They form 300-mile- 
wide bands of moving air called jet streams. The jet 
streams move from west to east, and their speed may 
reach 300 miles an hour. The main stream passes over 
the United States at about 40° latitude. But its path 
varies gready. The jet stream may bring storms and 
floods to regions on earth below it. 

The warm air that has traveled from the equator loses 
much of its heat in the polar region. Then it sinks and 
joins the cold polar air mass that pushes against fresh, 
warm air arriving from the subtropics. 

Geography. The movements of air masses do not 
settle into a simple, constant pattern. Many factors act 
together in complex ways to keep the forces that control 
weather constantly out of balance. 

Differences in Heating Land and Water. The sun heats 
land faster than it heats water. But water holds more 
heat, and holds it longer. So land and water areas that 
lie next to each other may have different temperatures. 
Breezes from oceans or large lakes modify the weather 
in areas that they reach. They increase the humidity of 
nearby land areas. The breezes cool the land in summer 
and warm it in winter. For example, a breeze from Lake 
Michigan in summer may lower the temperature in 
Chicago as much as 15°F. Warm ocean currents may 
flow toward the poles and bring warm winds to lands at 
high latitudes. For example, the Japan Current brings 
warm weather to Alaska. Other places at the same lati- 
tude are colder. See Climate (Why Climates Differ); 
Ocean (How the Ocean Moves). 

Position of the Sun. The sun shines directly above the 
equator only two days a year. The position of the equa- 
torial low and other pressure areas depends on the 
direction of the sun's rays. But the direction of the sun's 
rays changes throughout the year. The pressure areas 



are constantly moving as the path of the sun moves. 

Uneven Surface of the Earth. Mountain ranges and 
other geographic features may alter the temperature 
and direction of the prevailing winds. Mountains along 
a coast may block ocean breezes from inland areas. For 
example, the mountains of western Oregon and Wash- 
ington block rain-bearing winds from the Pacific Ocean. 
The western parts of these states are wet, but the eastern 
parts are relatively dry. Altitude also affects weather. 
Cities on mountains or plateaus usually have cooler 
temperatures than the surrounding lower areas. 

Fronts are narrow bands of changing weather between 
two different air masses. Most weather changes take 
place along fronts. When a cold air mass pushes a 
warmer air mass out of the way, it forms a cold front. 
When the warm air mass pushes against the cold air 
mass, it forms a warm front. If the battle goes neither 
way, it becomes a stationary front. A front formed when 
a cold front overtakes a warm front is called an occluded 
front. Weathermen expect overcast skies and continuous 
rain or snow ahead of a warm front. Showers or squalls 
usually form along a cold front. 

Most weather changes in North America occur along 
the polar front. In this region, the cold, dry polar air 
mass battles with the warm, moist air mass from the 
high-pressure belt of the subtropics. Many storms result 
from these differences in temperature and humidity 
between air masses. See Storm. 

Where Our Weather Comes From. In winter, lows 
called extra-tropical cyclones enter North America along 
the Pacific Coast. These cyclones form in the middle 
latitudes, usually on the polar front. They may cover an 
area 600 miles wide. The lows are carried along on the 
prevailing westerly winds, and bring moist air and rain 
or snow to the Western States and the Rocky Moun- 
tains. They generally turn southeast over the middle 
part of the United States, then northeast in the Appa- 
lachian region or Atlantic states. Southwest winds bring 



134 



PREDICTING TOMORROW'S WEATHER 



Careful observation of cloud formations, wind direction, ond barom- 
eter readings will help you predict what the coming weather 
will be like. The diagrams below show four typical weather 
situations, and indicate what kinds of weather they foretell. 



Continued Fair Weather. 

When scattered cumulus clouds 
dot the sky, the barometer re- 
mains steady or rises, and the 
wind blows gently from the 
west or northwest, fair weath- 
er will probably continue. 

BAROMETER RISING 





Rainstorm Approaching. 

Alto-cumulus clouds gathering 
on the horizon, winds blowing 
from the south or southwest, 
and a falling barometer usu- 
ally indicate an approaching 
storm. 

BAROMETER FALLING 





Continued Rain or Snow. 

When dull-gray alto-stratus 
clouds darken the whole sky, 
the wind blows from a south- 
easterly direction, and the 
barometer drops, rain or snow 
will probably continue to fall. 

BAROMETER FALLING 




Falling Temperatures. A 

clear night sky, a light wind 
blowing from the north or the 
northwest, and a steadily rising 
barometer usually indicate a 
coming drop in temperature. 

BAROMETER RISING STEADILY 






Birds Do Not Roosf Before a Storm as many people believe. 
There is no scientific basis for this superstition. 



WEATHER FACTS AND 





Aching Corns and other pains are not reliable guides for 
predicting bad weather, although changes in air pressure and 
moisture may possibly cause pain at sensitive spots. 



moist Gulf and Atlantic air to the area east of the 
Rockies. This moist air causes rain in the Southern 
States and rain or snow in the Northern States. Some 
lows become storms. 

Most lows are followed by highs. The highs usually 
bring clear skies and colder winds from points farther 
north. The weather often changes quickly in the fronts 
between these warm and cold air masses. Highs that 



A Chirping Criclcet can act as a living thermometer. Crickets 
chirp faster as the temperature rises. On warm days, adding 37 to 
the number of chirps in 1 5 seconds will about equal the temperature. 



move south from northern Canada bring severe cold in 
winter. Those that come from the northern Pacific are 
only moderately cold. 

In spring and autumn, the movement of weather is 
much the same. But the prevailing west winds are weaker 
than in winter. The weather changes are not so rapid 
or severe. In summer, the atmosphere over the United 
States is usually quiet or moving slowly. The weather 
becomes warm or hot. Local storms and thundershowers 
cause most of the rainfall. Air from the tropics moves 
over the Southern States during the summer, bringing 
weather from the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea. 

History of Weather Forecasting 

Early Days. Benjamin Franklin was one of the first 
persons to realize that storms moved across the land in a 
regular way. He found that most storms along the At- 
lantic Coast moved in a northeasterly pattern. But at 
that time (the late 1 700's) this knowledge could not be 
used to forecast storms. The storms moved faster than 
the mails. By the time weather observations arrived in a 
city, the storm had come and gone. 

After 1844, when Samuel Morse perfected the tele- 
graph, weather reports could reach an area before the 



UNUSUAL FACTS ABOUT THE WEATHER 



Driest Place on earth is Arica, Chile. Average annual 
rainfall is yg„ of an inch. At Iquique, Chile, no rain 
fell in 14 years of the period from 1899 to 1918. 

Foggiest Place in the United States is Cape Disap- 
pointment at the mouth of the Columbia River in Wash- 
ington. It has about 2,552 hours (106 days) of fog a year. 

Heaviest Rainfall recorded in a 24-hour period was 
46 inches at Baguio in the PhiUppines in July, 1911. 
Heaviest rainfall in one year was recorded at Cherra- 
punji, India, where 1,041 inches of rain fell between 
August, 1860, and July, 1861. 

Heaviest Snowfall recorded in the United States during 
a 24-hour period, 76 inches, occurred at Silver Lake, 
Colo., in 1921. The most snow recorded in the United 
States during one winter fell at Rainier Paradise Ranger 
Station in the state of Washington. A total of 1,000.3 
inches of snow fell during the winter of 1955-1956. 

Highest Air Pressure was recorded at Irkutsk, Siberia, 
in 1 893, when the sea-level barometric pressure reached 
31.75 inches. 

Highest Temperature recorded was 136°F., at Azizia, 

136 



Libya, in northern Africa, on Sept. 13, 1922. Highest 
recorded temperature in the United States was 134°F., 
in Death Valley, Calif., on July 10, 1913. 

Lovirest Air Pressure was recorded during a typhoon on 
the Pacific Ocean in 1958, when the sea-level barometric 
pressure fell to 25.90 inches. The lowest sea-level baro- 
metric pressure recorded on land was 26.35 inches at 
the Florida Keys during a hurricane in 1935. 

Lowest Temperature observed on the earth's surface was 
— 126.9°F., in Antarctica on Aug. 26, I960. The lowest 
temperature recorded in the United States was — 76°F., 
at Tanana, Alaska, in January, 1886. 

Strongest Winds measured near the earth's surface 
were recorded at Mount Washington, N.H., on April 12, 
1934. For five minutes the wind blew at a speed of 188 
miles an hour. One gust reached 231 miles an hour. 

Weather Disasters. Great storms may take a heavy toll 
of life and property. In 1900, for example, the storm tide 
of a hurricane killed 6,000 persons in Galveston, Tex. 
In 1955, Hurricane Diane killed almost 200 persons and 
caused §750,000,000 in damage along the Atlantic Coast. 



WEATHER SUPERSTITIONS 




The Migration of Birds does not forecast whether cold winter 
weather will arrive early or late. Birds may fly south early or late 
in the seoson for many different reasons. 



weather did. In 1849, Joseph Henr\', secretan' of the 
Smithsonian Institution, received and analyzed the first 
\seather reports sent by telegraph. The French astrono- 
mer Urbain Leverrier (181 1-1871) first used the tele- 
graph in a practical way to forecast weather conditions. 
He showed that a central office, receiving weather 
reports by telegraph from many places, could forecast 
storms. In 1854, Napoleon III, the French emperor, 
instnicted Leverrier to organize a weather-forecasting 
system for France. By the late 1800's, the United States 
and many countries in Europe had set up systems of 
daily observations and forecasts. In 1870, the U.S. Con- 
gress set up a national weather service as part of the 
Army Signal Corps. In 1890, the ser\-ice was changed to 
a civilian organization known as the Weather Bureau. 

Scientific Advances. Since the 1880's, weathermen 
have learned much about the behavior of weather ele- 
ments and storms. By the early 1900's, weather forecasts 
were accurate enough to be useful. At that time, hvo 
men proposed new ideas that completely changed the 
methods of weather forecasting. 

The Nonvegian meteorologist \'ilhelm Bjerknes ( 1 862- 
1951) obser\'ed that air above the earth can be thought 
of as masses with different properties. Separating these 
masses, he found zones of rapidly changing conditions. 
He called these zones fronts. Bjerknes, his son Jakob, 
and other Norwegian meteorologists, analyzed the con- 
ditions and movements of these masses and fronts. Their 
theories greatly improved the accuracy of weather 
forecasting. 

The British meteorologist Lewis Fr&gt;' Richardson ( 1 88 1 - 
1953) thought that the principles of mathematics could 
be used to help forecast weather. He used the laws of 
motion and heat to make calculations from weather ob- 
ser\ations. From these calculations, he showed how 
weather forecasts could be made. His basic concept was 
correct, but his idea was not practical in the early 1 900's. 
The calculations took so long that the weather had 
come and gone before the forecast was finished. There 
were too few observations available to make accurate 
forecasts, and Richardson's equations were not in the 
right form to predict weather accurately. 

For many years, scientists thought that Richardson's 
idea had no practical value. Then, in the late 1940's, 




The Ground Hog is supposed to leave his den at noon, February 
2. Tradition says that If he sees his shadow, cold weather will con- 
tinue for six more weeks. This belief has no basis in fact. 




Atomic Explosions do not affect weather over large areas. A 
moderate-sized hurricane releases more energy than 1 ,000 atomic 
bombs. The most powerful bomb has less energy than a tornado. 



electronic computers were developed. They could do 
the needed calculations quickly enough to be useful. By 
this time, the number of weather stations and the fre- 
quency of observations had increased. At the end of 
World War II, a group of American meteorologists, led 
by the mathematician John von Neumann (1903-1957), 
found a way to write the laws of physics so that mete- 
orologists could use them to make forecasts. 

During \\''orld War II, pilots flying over Japan found 
the winds at certain high altitudes extremely strong. 
Carl-Gustaf Rossby (1898-1957), a Swedish-American 
meteorologist, investigated these winds after the war. 
The winds, called jet streams, have great importance to 
aviation because they affect the speeds of high-altitude 
flights. Meteorologists believe that the jet stream helps 
form, intensify, and direct highs, lows, hurricanes, and 
other \veather conditions on the earth. Forecasters pay 
close attention to the location, strength, and movement 
of jet streams. 

Information about conditions in the upper atmosphere 
helps weatliermen forecast accurately. They receive 
most of this information from instrument-canv'ing bal- 
loons. In 1959, the United States sent into orbit the first 
satellite specifically designed to gadier, record, and 
transmit weadier information back to earth. 

Much of the information gathered during the Inter- 
national Geophysical Year (IGY) in 1957 and 1958 in- 
creased weather knowledge. Antarctic bases established 



137 



WEATHER REPORTS 
FROM SPACE 




Clouds Over Egypt appear as white blotches in photo taken by TV camera in 
Tiros I OS it orbited 450 miles above the earth. Pictures of cloud cover help in under- 
standing and forecasting weather. Map, left, shows area of photograph. 



during the IGY made it possible for weathermen to 
obtain information for making the first complete world 
weather map. 

On April 1, I960, the United States launched the 
first artificial satellite equipped to provide photo- 
graphs of the earth's weather conditions. Known as 
Tiros I, its two television cameras transmitted both 
broad and detailed pictures of the earth's cloud cover. 
During the early 1960's, Tiros I and other weather 
satellites continued to provide valuable information 
about weather conditions in many parts of the world. 
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA) cooperated with the United States Weather 
Bureau in launching and using U.S. weather satellites. 
In 1963, the United States and Russia agreed to ex- 
change weather information obtained from satellites. 
The two countries set up a research exchange line kept 
open 24 hours a day and began exchanging photographs 
of cloud formations. 

In 1963, the World Meteorological Organization, 
a specialized agency of the United Nations, approved 
a plan for mapping the weather around the globe. The 
plan, known as a World Weather Watch, called for arti- 
ficial satellites and thousands of land and sea stations 
to gather weather information. Three world centers 
would use this information to make long-range weather 
forecasts. 

Attempts to Control the Weather. Many ancient and 
primitive societies tried to find ways to control the 

138 



weather. They wanted rain to make their crops grow, or 
they wanted to stop the rain to prevent floods. Some 
tribes made offerings or sacrifices to their gods. Others 
held dances to pray for rain. More civilized people tried 
to control the weather by shooting off cannons or by 
setting off" other explosions. In farm areas, some men 
called themselves "rain makers" and earned their living 
by promising to make rain during droughts. 

Cloud seeding is the modern, scientific approach to 
rain making. An airplane may drop dry ice, salt parti- 
cles, water spray, or other substances into a cloud 
in order to "seed" it. Or silver iodide "seeds" may 
be released from the ground and carried into the cloud 
by the wind. If conditions are favorable, tiny droplets 
of water from the cloud collect around each "seed" 
and fall to the earth as rain or snow. But cloud seeding 
is not successful unless the clouds are almost ready to 
to produce rain. See Rain Making. 

Cloud seeding is usually used to make rain when 
there is a drought. But cloud seeding methods have 
also been used to get rid of fog and to prevent fruit trees 
and other crops from being damaged by wind and hail. 
By seeding the clouds before they reach an area with 
valuable crops, experts can sometimes reduce the 
strength of a storm and save crops from harm. 

Scientists have experimented with controlling the 
weather in several other ways. These include sending 
an electric current through a cloud, and seeding clouds 
with chemicals other than silver iodide. 



Meteorologists in all parts of the world stud&gt;- cloud 
seeding and other ways of controlling the weather. They 
hope to learn how to alter the paths of hurricanes, con- 
trol the evaporation from the seas, thaw out frozen areas 
near the North and South poles, and change wind 
patterns over the land. James e. miller 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Elements of Weather 



Blizzard 


Frost 


Mistral 


Squall 


Chinook 


Call 




Monsoon Storm 


Cloud 


Hail 


Norther 


Temperature 


Cloudburst 


Har 


■mattan 


Prevailing Thunder 


Cyclone 


Humidity 


Weste 


rly Tornado 


Dew 


Hurricane 


Rain 


Trade Wind 


Drought 


Ice 




Rainbow Typhoon 


Dust 


Jet: 


Stream 


Sandsto 


rm Waterspout 


Dust Storm 


Khamsin 


Simoom 


Whirlwind 


Evaporation 


Land and Sea 


Sirocco 


Wind 


Foehn 


Bi 


-eezes 


Sleet 


Zephyr 


Fog 


Lightning 


.Snow 






Weather Instruments 


.'Vnemometer 


Radiosonde 




Thermocouple 


Barometer 


Rain Gauge 




Thermograph 


Hygrometer 


Space Travel 




Thermometer 


Kite 


(Artificial Satellites) 


Weather Vane 






Unclass: 


IFIED 




Air 




Flag (col 


or pic- 


Spring 


Air Conditioning 


ture. Flags 


Summer 


Atmosphere 




That Talk) 


Sunspot 


Autumn 




Horse Latitudes 


Troposphere 


Boats and Boating 


Indian S 


ummer 


Weather Bureau, 


(picture, Warn- 


Isobar 




United States 


ing .Signals) 




Isotherm 


I 


Winter 


Calms, Region; 


sof 


Meteorology 


World (Natural 


Climate 




Rain Making 


Factors) 


Doldrums 




Season 







Outline 



I. 



C. Kinds of Forecasts 



C. Effects of a .Storm 



C. Moisture 

D. Air Pressure 

Fronts 

Where Our Weather 
Comes From 



Weather Forecasting 

A. Observations 

B. Analysis 
II. The Story of o Storm 

A. Birth of a Storm 

B. Tracking a .Storm 

III. What Makes' Up Weather? 
.\. Temperature 
B. Wind 

IV. Weather Patterns 

A. Temperature Patterns D. 

B. -Air Movement E. 

C. Geography 
V. History of Weather Forecasting 

Questions 

What are the four main elements of weather? 

How does the rotation of the earth affect the direc- 
tion of winds? 

Why must weather forecasters know the weather in 
distant areas? 

How does the Coriolis force affect the direction of 
weather in the United States? 

How do weather forecasters track a hurricane? 

How are computers used in weather forecasting? 

How does man control the weather? 

How has the weather affected your life recently? 

Why are weather forecasts not always accurate? 

How does the earth's surface affect weather-" 

What is the difference between weather and climate? 

What is the highest temperature ever recorded? 

How does temperature affect air pressure? 

What is an anemometer? A hygrometer? A rain gauge? 

WEATHER BALLOON. See Balloon. 



WEATHER SATELLITE 

WEATHER BUREAU, UNITED STATES, provides fore- 
casts, observations, and records of the weather in the 
United States and its territories. The Bureau issues 
forecasts and reports for the general public, and pro- 
vides several special services. It sends out warnings 
of hurricanes, tornadoes, and other dangerous storms. 
It measures rainfall and river levels in order to fore- 
cast navigation, flood, and water-supply conditions. 
The Bureau also issues special weather information 
for farmers and airplane pilots. It keeps records of the 
climate of the United States and other countries, and 
studies ways to improve weather forecasting. 

The Weather Bureau is an agency of the Department 
of Commerce. It has a central office in Washington, 
D.C., and regional offices in New York City; Kansas 
City, Mo.; Fort Worth, Texas; Salt Lake City, Utah; 
and Anchorage, Alaska. About 300 weather stations in 
the United States and its possessions have full-time 
staffs. These stations take observations every three or 
six hours. The Weather Bureau has more than 12,000 
substations that gather infomiation on weather. About 
3,500 of these substations send reports of the current 
weather to the main offices by telephone and telegraph. 
Some substations provide flags and lights to warn 
ships of dangerous weather conditions. The Severe 
Local Storm Center at Kansas City, Mo., keeps a 
constant watch for conditions that may produce tor- 
nadoes or other severe local storms. 

.Several federal agencies work closely with the 
Weather Bureau. For example, the Coast Guard gath- 
ers weather infonnation from merchant ships when the 
ships report their positions at sea. The Federal Aviation 
Agency helps the Weather Bureau gather weather in- 
formation at airport weather stations and supply weath- 
er reports to pilots. The Weather Bureau cooperates 
with the National Aeronautics and Space Adminis- 
tration in the operation and use of weather satellites. 
These satellites circle the earth and take pictures of 
clouds. They send the pictures to ground receiving 
stations. Satellites make it possible to gather weather 
information in distant lands and seas. 

Weather reports pour into the Weather Bureau's 
National Meteorological Center near Washington, D.C. 
There, the Analysis and Forecast, Computation, and 
Extended Forecast branches analyze the reports. They 
make forecasts with the aid of high-speed computers 
and distribute them to local offices. The Weather 
Bureau also exchanges reports with other nations. 

Weather advice, forecasts, reports, and warnings 
are given to the public by means of newspapers, radio, 
telegraph, telephone, and television. Many weather 
Bureau offices are connected to radio stations, and 
the local forecasters speak directly to ffie public. 

The public weather service of the United States 
began in 1870 as part of the Anny Signal Corps, In 
1890, Congress organized the Weather Bureau under 
the Department of Agriculture. The President trans- 
ferred the Bureau to the Department of Commerce in 

1940. Critically reviewed by United States Weather Bureau 

See also Weather (Weather Forecasting; History). 
WEATHER FORECASTING. See Weather. 
WEATHER SATELLITE. See Space Tr.wel (Arti- 
frciai Satellites). 



139 




Whitehall XTolal Sludios 

A Weather Vane shows the direction from which the wind comes. 
The crowing rooster on the arrow gave it the name weat/iercocfe. 



WEATHER VANE is a device that turns freely on an 
uprigiit rod and points in tlie direction from which wind 
comes. It is also called a ivind vane or wfnthercoik. The 
weather vane is one of the oldest weather instruments 
and is often ornamental in shape. 

The part of the vane which turns into the wind is 
usually shaped like an arrow. The other end is wide, 
so it will catch the smallest breeze. The breeze turns the 
arrow until it catches both sides of the wide end equally. 
Thus, the arrow always points into the wind. Below 
the arrow is a round plate on which the directions are 
marked. Vanes used by weather bureaus have electrical 
connections that record wind direction in a room far 

from the vane itself. John Vernor Finch 

WEATHERING. See Geology (Weathering Destroys 
Rock); .Son. (Water). 

WEATHERLY, FREDERIC. See Londonderry Air. 

WEAVER, ROBERT CLIFTON (1907- ), was ap- 
pointed administrator of the Housing and Home Finance 
Agency by President John F. Kennedy in 1961. At the 
time, it was the highest appointive federal office ever 
held by a Negro. 

He began his government career in 1933 as adviser on 
Negro affairs in the Department of the Interior. Weaver 
was named New York Deputy State Housing Commis- 
sioner in 1954. Named State Rent Administrator in 
1955, he became the first Negro to attain cabinet rank 
in New York. Weaver also served as chairman of the 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People. He was awarded the Spingarn medal in 1962 
(see Spinc;arn Medal). 

Weaver was born in Washington, D.C. He received 
the B..S. degree from Harvard University in .1929 and 



the M.A. degree in 1931. After teaching for a year, he 
returned to Harvard and received his Ph.D. in 1934. 

WEAVERBIRD is a small bird that usually weaves a 
hanging nest. There are about 275 kinds of weaverbirds. 
They live in most parts of the world. The familiar house 
or English sparrow found in the United States is a 
weaverbird. Weaverbirds eat seeds and grain. They 
cannot sing well, but they chatter continually. Most 
females and young weaverbirds are plainly colored. 
But the males are generally brightly colored during the 
mating season. 

The sociable weaver of South Africa builds an um- 
brella-shaped community roof of sticks and grass in a 
tree. The roof is often as large as an African hut. The 
underside of the roof is divided into compartments, 
each occupied by a pair of birds. As many as 95 indi- 
vidual nests have been counted imder one roof. The fe- 
male lays three or four speckled, purple-gray eggs. 

The Java sparrow uses grasses to weave its nest. It 
makes the opening on the side. The female lays six or 
more white eggs. The baya, which lives in India and 
Ceylon, builds a flask-shaped nest with a long, tubular- 
shaped entrance. It hangs its nest fronl thorny branches 
or the tips of palm leaves. 

Scientific Classification. Weaverbirds belong to the 
family Ploceidae. The sociable weaver is genus Phile- 
laerus, species P. socius. The house sparrow is Passer 
dotnesticus. Leonard W. Wing 

See also Bird (Building the Nest; color picture, Birds 
of Other Lands); English Sparrow. 

WEAVING. Man was a weaver as early as the New 
Stone Age. He had learned to make a rough kind of 
clothing from the fibers of the flax plant. The making of 
linen cloth had become a fine art by the time of the 
ancient Egyptians. About 2000 B.C., the Chinese dis- 
covered how to unwind the threads of silkworm cocoons 
and weave them into cloth. At about the same time, 
the people of India found 
out how to make cloth from 
the fibersof the cotton plant. 
I n ancientGreece and Rome 
the weaving of silk, wool, 
linen, and cotton cloth had 
been highly developed. 
Weaving had become more 
than a simple interlacing of 
lengthwise and crosswise 
threads. Men had figured 
out ways to cross the differ- 
ent threads so as to make 
beautiful patterns in the 

material. Colorful and intricate tapestries were woven in 
Persia and India. By the 1400"s, the city of Arras, in 
Flanders, had become famous for its tapestries (see 
Tapestry). 

During the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, people 
wove cloth in their homes on awkward hand looms. 
Mothers wove the cloth and made the clothing for all 
the members of the family. About 1 764, James Har- 
greaves of England invented the spinning jenny (see 
Spinning Jenny). It could make thread from plant and 
animal fibers. The inventions of Hargreaves and others 
made large supplies of yarn available, and faster weav- 
ing was demanded. In 1785, Edmund Cartwright, an 
English clergyinan, invented a power loom, a mechani- 



Warp — *■ 




Arrangement of warp and 
weft threads in the plain weave 



140 



cal device for weaving (see Cartwright, Edmund). 
Cartwriglit's power loom ran by steam. It was essentially 
the same as a hand loom, but working parts took the 
place of human hands, ^\'ithin the next 1 50 years, weav- 
ing became a factory operation. In the United States, 
the industry grew rapidly. Today, the yearly value of 
its products totals more than $2,000,000,000.' 

How Cloth Is Woven 

Loose strands of yarn are made into cloth in much 
the same way that we darn a sock. That is, a group of 
length\vise threads are arranged in rows very close to- 
gedier. Crosswise threads are then laced over and under 
the lengthwise threads. The ancient weavers strung the 
lengthwise threads on a frame, and laced the crosswise 
threads in by using a shutde somewhat like a large 
needle. They raised and lowered the lengthwise threads 
bv hand, to allow the shuttle to go under and over them. 
Later, a device called the harness was invented to raise 
and lower the lengthwise threads automatically. 

Today, machines perform the entire weaving process. 
The harness, shuttles, and other weaving devices work 
automatically. Power looms of today require few human 
workers. The loom of tomorrow may work without yarn 
itself, making cloth directly from synthetic ingredients, 
somewhat as a waffle iron makes waffles. Nets and other 
thin textiles have already been made this way. 

The Basic Weaves 

All weaving has drree basic forms: (1) the plain 
weave, (2) the t\vill weave, and (3) the satin weave. 

Plain Weave. Many of our cottons and linens are 
woven in plain weave. The lengthwise, or warp, threads 
are set evenly on the frame. The shutde carrying the 
crosswise, weft or woof, threads goes over one warp, then 



WEAVING 

under the next, then over, and so on until the material 
is woven. Some of the plain-weave cloths are gingham, 
percale, chambray, table linen, shantung, woolen, 
tweed, and voile. 

Twill Weave is made by crossing of the lengthwise 
threads by the crosswise threads in an irregular way, so 
that the finished cloth has rows of diagonally raised 
lines. Gabardine, covert cloth, twill, and many other of 
our common clodis are twill-woven. The very tightly 
drawn threads in this weave give longer wear to the 
cloth. For this reason, men's and women's suits are often 
made from these kinds of cloth. 

The number of warp yarns which are taken in at each 
crossing of the weft yarns varies with different twills, but 
the principle is the same in all. For example, to make 
gabardine, the first set of weft yarns crosses one warp 
yarn, then goes under two, over one, and repeats on to 
the end of the row. The next set of weft yarns, however, 
crosses two lengthwise yarns, then goes under two, over 
one, and so on to the end of the row of lengthwise yarns. 

Safin Weave is really a broken twill in which the twill 
lines do not show. Instead of progressing one warp yarn 
at tire beginning of each new crossing of the weft yarns, 
it progresses two. The material gets its smooth appear- 
ance on one side because the many warp yarns hide the 
weft yarns. Elizabeth Cheslev Baity 

Related Articles in World Book include: 



Basket Weaving 
Handicraft (picture) 
Hobby (picture. Weaving) 
Indian, American (color 

pictures) 
Iran (picture, Young Girls) 
Jacquard, Joseph M. 



North Carolina (color 

picture) 
Philippines (picture, 

Filipino Women) 
Rugs and Carpets 
Textile 
Utah (color picture) 



Students Demonstrate Oriental Weaving on Hand Loom. A Single Workman Can Tend Several Power Looms. 

Ewing Galloway; Douglas Gcndieai 




141 



WEBB INSTITUTE 

WEBB INSTITUTE OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE is a 

private technological college for men at Glen Cove, 
N.Y. It is the only college which devotes its curriculum 
to naval architecture and marine engineering. All stu- 
dents have full expense scholarships for the four-year 
course. Admission is by competitive examination. Webb 
Institute was founded in 1889. For enrollment, see 
Universities AND Colleges (table). thomas m. curran 

WEBB-KENYON LAW. See Prohibition (National 
Action). 

WEBB-POMERENE ACT is a bill that modified the 
Sherman Antitrust Act by allowing corporations to form 
business combinations (trusts) for foreign-trade purposes. 
It was passed by the United States Congress in 1918. 

See also Trust (Trust Legislation). 

WEBER, in physics, is a unit of magnetic fliix (the 
lines of force that surround a magnet). Flux demity 
(magnetic field strength) is measured in webcrs per 
square meter, and is numerically equal to the number 
of lines of force passing through one square meter. 

WEBER, VAY ber, CARL MARIA VON (1786-1826), 
is chiefly remembered as a composer of German operas. 
His Der Freischiitz (1821) maintains its popularity in 
Germany. Its overture and those of Euryanthe (1823) 
and Oberon (1826) are still played. Weber's lifework 
had two important results. As foimder of the German 
romantic opera, he deeply influenced Richard Wagner, 
and his imaginative use of the orchestra so excited Louis 
Hector Berlioz and other composers, that they soon 
followed his lead. Weber was born at Eutin, in Olden- 
burg. Theodore M. Finney 

WEBER, VAY ber, MAX (1864-1920), was a German 
sociologist and economist. He investigated the role re- 
ligions play in economic development. He became 
famous for his controversial theory of the Puritan, or 
Calvinistic, origin of capitalism. In his The Protestant 
Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1904-1905), he stated 
that the accumulation of wealth was stimulated by the 
Puritans' interpretation of earthly success as a badge of 
salvation. Weber was born in Erfurt. H. w. Spiegel 

WEBER, WEB ur, MAX (1881-1961), was one of a 
small group of artists who introduced new styles of art 
to the United States. A brilliant and inventive artist, 
Weber was interested in poetic and philosophic thought. 
He used rich colors and distorted drawing to portray 
subjects from his Jewish religious heritage and from city 
life. Weber was born in Bialystok, Russia, and studied 

in Paris. George D. Culler 

WEBER RIVER. See Utah (Rivers and Lakes). 

WEBSTER, DANIEL (1782-1852), was the best-known 
American orator, and one of the ablest law^-ers and 
statesmen of his time. He gained his greatest fame as the 
champion of a strong national government. For years 
after his death, schoolboys memorized thrilling lines 
from his speeches. Such words as "Liberty and L'nion, 
now and forever, one and inseparable!" inspired many 
Northern soldiers during the Civil War. 

Early Career. Webster was born on Jan. 18, 1782, in 
Salisbury (now Franklin), N.H., and was graduated 
from Dartmouth College (see New Hampshire [color 
picture, Daniel Webster's Birthplacel). He studied law 
in Boston, and then became a successful lawyer in Ports- 
mouth, N.H. At the beginning of his career,- Webster 



did not favor a strong national government. Instead, he 
stood for the rights of the states. 

Portsmouth was a thriving seaport until President 
Thomas Jefferson's embargo and the War of 1812 de- 
stroved most of its overseas trade. Siding with the local 
shipowners, Webster opposed tiade restrictions and war. 
As a Federalist in the L^nited .States House of Repre- 
sentatives from 1813 to 1817, he objected to war taxes, 
and helped defeat a bill for drafting soldiers. He said 
that state governments should ''interpose" to protect 
their citizens from the national government. 

Webster moved to Boston in 1816. New spinning and 
weaving mills were springing up along New England 
streams where there was water power. In much of the 
Northeast, manufacturing came to be more important 
than shipping. The manufacturers desired a strong 
national government that could aid business. 

As a friend and attorney of northeastern business- 
men, Webster changed his views on national power and 
states' rights. In the Dartmouth College case, he argued 
against New Hampshire's claim to control the coUege 
and won the verdict of the Supreme Court of the United 
States (see Dartmouth College). In another famous 
case, he held that it was constitutional for the Federal 
government to charter a national bank. Representing 
Massachusetts in the United States House of Repre- 
sentatives from 1823 to 1827, he insisted that a protec- 
tive tariff was unconstitutional. But after his election to 
the LTnited States .Senate in 1827, he became the coun- 
try's most elocjuent tariff' advocate. 

The U.S. Senator. The so-called "Tariff" of Abomi- 
nations," passed in 1828, led John C. Calhoun of South 
Carolina to develop the theory that a state could 
"nullify" federal laws, and refuse to obey them (see 
Nullification). .Senator Robert Y. Hayne of South 
Carolina made a brilliant defense of nullification in 
1830, and Webster answered him with a famous speech 
declaring that the Constitution had created a single, 
unified nation (see Hayne, Robert Young). Two years 
later, when South Carolina tried to put nullification 
into effect, Webster gave powerful support to President 
Andrew Jackson in resisting the attempt. 

But Webster disagreed with Jackson on other issues, 
especially on the question of the Bank of the United 
States. When Jackson vetoed a bill for rechartering the 
bank, Webster did his best to save the institution, but 
failed (see Bank of the United .States). 

During his last years in the Senate, Webster opposed 
adding Texas to the Union, and also opposed the war 
with Mexico. He feared that the country might break 
up because of a quarrel over territories in the West. 
Most Northerners wished to keep slaveiy from spread- 
ing into the new territories, but Southerners were ready 
to separate from the Union if the spread of slaveiy was 
prevented. In a "Union-saving" speech, Webster fa- 
vored the Compromise of 1850, and helped get it passed 
(see Compromise of 1850). Some Northerners de- 
nounced him because he was willing to give Southern- 
ers part of what they wanted. 

Secrefary of State. Webster served as Secretary of 
State under Presidents William Henry Harrison and 
John Tyler, and then under President Millard Fillmore. 
Under Tyler, he negotiated the Webster-.Ashburton 
Treaty which settled the Maine boundary dispute and 
avoided a war with Great Britain (see Webster-.\sh- 



142 



Daniel Webster, standing, right, 
with his arm raised, addressed the 
United States Senate in the great 
debate on the Constitution and union 
in 1850. Webster urged acceptance 
of the Compromise of 1 850 to help 
preserve the Union. 




BURTON Treat\'). Under Fillmore, he befriended the 
Hungarian patriot Lajos Kossuth and spoke for Hun- 
garian independence (see Kossuth, Lajos), 

The Man. After the founding of the Whig party in 
the 1830's, Webster became one of its top leaders, along 
with his great rival, Henry Clay. His Whig friends 
thought he deserved to be President, and he ran as one 
of the party's three candidates in 1836. His later failures 
to be nominated or elected President made him bitter 
at the end of his life. In 1957, Webster was one of the 
first men elected to the United .States .Senate Hall of 
Fame. 

Personally, Webster was a handsome, imposing man 
with deep-set, penetrating eyes, craggy brows, dark 

complexion, and a rich voice. Richard N. Current 

WEBSTER, HAROLD TUCKER. .See Cartoon (Lead- 
ing Cartoonists). 

WEBSTER, JOHN (1580?- 1625?), was an English 
dramatist of the later Elizabethan period. He is most 
noted for two tragedies. The While Devil (1612) and The 
Duchess of A/a//( (1623). The latter, a moving tragedy of 
violence, was revived a number of times in the 1900's. 
Webster was interested in the theme of revenge. Like 
Christopher Marlowe, he filled his plays with desperate 
and lawless characters. He wrote one comedy. The 
Devil's Law Case (1623), and worked with Philip Mas- 
singer and others on two or three more plays. Leo Hughes 

WEBSTER, MARGARET (1905- ), an actress and 
director, became famous for her exciting productions 
of Shakespeare's plays. In 1938, she achieved overnight 
success in New York City with her direction of Richard 
//. She also directed Hamlet and Henry IV, and acted 
in The Sea Gull, Family Portrait, Alice in Wonderland, 
and John Gabriel Borkman. .She acted with the Old Vic 
and other English theatrical companies. .She was born 
in New York City, the daughter of British parents. 
Her mother was the English actress Dame May 

V\ hUtV. M.^RY Virginia Heinlein 

WEBSTER, NOAH (1 758-1843), was an American edu- 
cator and journalist who won fame for compiling I(V/i- 
sler's Dictionary. This work was the finest English dic- 
tionary of its time. Today, in its latest revised and en- 
larged form, Webster''s Third. New International Dictionary, 
it is often used in courts as final authority on the 
meaning of words. As a comprehensive dictionary of the 
English language, it is surpassed only by The Oxford 
English Dictionary, in 12 volumes and a supplement. 



Webster was born in the village of West Hartford, 
Conn., on Oct. 16, 1758. He was descended from John 
Webster, governor of Connecticut in 1656, and from 
William Bradford, governor of Plymouth Colony from 
1621 to 1656. Webster was graduated from Yale Col- 
lege. He then studied law and was admitted to the bar 
at Hartford. But Webster practiced law for only a short 
time. 

While teaching school at Goshen, N.Y., in the 1 780's, 
he compiled an elementary spelling book. He then com- 
piled a grammar, and, finally, a reader for school chil- 
dren. Millions of copies of the speller were sold well into 
the 1900's, and they helped to standardize spelling and 
pronunciation in the L^nited States. 

Webster campaigned for the first American copyright 
laws. He becaine an active member of the Federalist 
party, and wrote many political pamphlets. In 1 787, he 
became the editor of two Federalist newspapers. After 
1803, he devoted most of 



work 



his 




Brown Bros. 



Noah Webster 



his time to 
dictionaries. 

In 1806, Webster pub- 
lished his first dictionary. 
He thought of it as a pre- 
liminary effort. His great 
dictionary, An American 
Dictionary of the English 
Language, appeared in two 
volumes in 1828. This 
work, which was enlarged 
for an edition in 1840, in- 
cluded 12,000 words and 
40,000 definitions that had 
never before appeared in a 

dictionary. After his death, Webster's heirs sold the 
rights to the dictionary to the G. and C. Merriam Co. of 
Springfield, Mass. o. e. bentley 

See also Dictionary (History). 

WEBSTER-ASHBURTON TREATY was an agreement 
signed by representatives of the United States and Great 
Britain. It settled a number of annoying disputes between 
the two countries. 

Secretary of State Daniel Webster signed it for the 
United States and Lord Ashburton for Great Britain 
at Washington, D.C., in August, 1842. 

The most important dispute settled was the fixing of 
the boundary line between Canada and the state of 



143 



WEBSTER COLLEGE 

Maine. The United States received more than half of 
the disputed area of 12,000 square miles. The treaty 
settled other disputes of a minor nature, and a clause 
of the treaty provided for the mutual extradition of 
criminals. 

The negotiations also provided opportunity for the 
peaceful discussion of problems arising from British 
efforts to suppress the African slave trade. The Webster- 
Ashburton Treaty was one of the many instances in 
which the United .States and Great Britain settled dis- 
putes without going to war. John d. hicks 

WEBSTER COLLEGE is a school for women at Webster 
Groves, Mo. It is conducted by the Sisters of Loretto 
at the Foot of the Cross. Webster College was founded 
in 1915. It was affiliated with St. Louis Univereity until 
1957. Courses lead to the bachelor's degree. For enroll- 
ment, see Universities and Coli-eoes (table). 

WEDDING. .See M.^rri.vge. 

WEDDING ANNIVERSARY. The yearly anniversaiy 
of the da\- two persons were married is often an occa- 
sion for celebration and gift giving. The peoples of many 
lands celebrate \vedding anniversaries according to their 
own customs and traditions. In the United States, each 
anniversaiy gradtially came to have a name of its own. 
These names were based on the gifts persons gave to 
mark the end of that particular year of married life. 
Today wedding anniversaries are often celebrated with- 
out regard for the name or gift that was once thought 
appropriate. But many persons still cling to the old cus- 
tom of giving a certain type of gift on each anniversary. 

Certain anniversaries and the type of gifts which 
mark their celebration are listed below. 

First Paper 

Second Cotton or straw 

Third Leather 

Fourth Fruit, flowers, or books 

Fifth Wooden 

Sbcth Candy 

Seventh Woolen 

Eighth Pottery or bronze 

Ninth Willow or straw 

Tenth Tin 

Twelfth Silk and fine linen 

Fifteenth Ciystal 

Twentieth China 

Twenty-fifth Silver 

Thirtieth Pearl 

Fortieth Ruby or emerald 

Fiftieth Golden 

Sixtieth, Seventieth, or Seventy-fifth Diamond 

Some couples renew their marriage vows on a wedding 

anniversan'. Marion F. Lan.sing 

WEDDING DANCE, the painting. See Breughel 

(Pieter Breughel the Elder). 

WEDDING RING. .See Ring. 

WEDGE is a type of simple machine with two or 
more slanted, or inclined, planes which taper to a thin 
edge or point. Wedges are used in piercing or splitting 
heavy objects. The wedge may be made of wood or 
metal. For example, nails, pins, axes, and needles act 
as wedges because they push or drive through an object. 
Cutting tools, such as knives and scissors, are also types 
of wedges. Wooden wedges are often used in. splitting 

H4 



logs and rails. Force is applied to tlie wedge by a heavy 
blow from a tool such as an ax. As the wedge cuts 
through, it meets with a great deal of resistance due to 
friction. For this reason, no mathematical formula can 
determine the mechanical advantage of the wedge. It 
is known only that the longer the wedge in proportion 
to its thickness, the easier it is to drive the wedge 
through a resisting body. Wedges also push or lift 
heavy loads. See also Inclined Plane; Machine (pic- 
ture, SLx .Simple Machines). Robert f. paton 
WEDGWOOD, JOSIAH (1730-1795), was the out- 
standing leader in the pottery industry during the great- 
est period of British pottery making. He became a 
master potter at 29. and was successful in his own busi- 
ness. Three years later, in partnership with Thomas 



The Wedgwood Pottery 

was started by Josiah Wedg- 
wood, left, at Ivy House, Burs- 
lem, England, below, in 1 759. 
He discovered the fine colored 
glaze used in his pottery. 




■5": :" 




4^ 


■.?■ 


^ 


'^fe- 


nm'§ 


li'iiliilr 



Bentley, a London merchant, he started the Etruria 
factory at Hanley. There he perfected the clays, glazes, 
and processes that made Wedgwood ware famous (see 
Wedgwood Ware). He improved kno\\n processes, and 
invented and perfected new ones. Wedgwood was 
born in Burslem, Staffordshire, a district rich in pot- 

ter\" claVS. Eugene F. Bunker, Jr. 

WEDGWOOD WARE is a high-grade chinaware first 
m.ide b&gt;- England's most famous potter, Josiah Wedg- 
wood. His experiments resulted in the creation of 
Chmn's Ware, in 1762, in honor of Queen Charlotte, 
wife of George III. Later, other classes of Wedgivood 
ware became important. They included Egyptian black, 
or basalts, used for medallion portraits, vases, busts, 
seals, and similar objects; red ware, or Rosso antico, used 
for cameo reliefs; white semiporcelain, or fine stoneware, 
with a lustrous, smooth surface; and jasper, the final 
product of the great potter. 

For jasper, Josiah Wedgwood used white, various 
tints of blue, lilac, pink, sage green, olive green, yellow, 
and black. Objects made of this ware include medal- 
lions, cameos, statuettes, pedestals, flowerpots, and 
vases. Figures in relief, or with a raised design, repre- 
sented classical art, and adorned many objects made 



from jasper. Famous artists made the designs. White 
cameo reliefs on a blue background have been used in 

manv inexpensive copies. Charles M. Harder 

.See also Wedgwood, Josiah. 

WEDNESDAY, It'EN^dih. is the English name for the 
fourth day of the week. This day gets its name from 
Woden, or Odin, the chief god in Teutonic mythology, 
to whom it was sacred. At the beginning of the Christian 
Era. the Germans called it Woden's-day. Its name later 
changed to Wednesday. The first to name tlie days of the 
week after gods in mythology were the ancient Romans. 
They called the fourth day of the week after the god 
Mercury. From this name, the French called Wednes- 
day mercredl. Grace Humphrey 

See also Ash Wednesday; Odin; Week. 

WEED is a plant that is troublesome and worthless in 
the place where it is growing. Experts of the United 
States Department of Agriculture have estimated that 
the yearlv loss to farm crops caused by weeds is about 
$5,000,000,000. 

The dividing line between weeds and useful plants 
does not lie in the plants themselves, but in the way men 
use them. Plants that are considered weeds in one place 
may be cultivated in another. For example, oats grow- 
ing in a cornfield would be weeds, but oats are useful 
plants in an oat field. Grass grows in almost every 
plowed field, and gets in the way of the crop. In such a 
place, grass is a weed. But grass may be a very valuable 
crop in a hayfield or pasture. 

Sometimes plants usually considered weeds are actu- 
allv useful. They may serve as food for wild animals and 
birds. Certain weeds can be used as forage for farm 



WEED 

animals. Also, weeds often help to control soil erosion. 

Kinds of Weeds. Weeds may be divided into three 
classes. The annuals live only one year. Biennials live 
two years, or two growing seasons. The perennials are 
weeds that live longer than two years. 

Annuals grow new plants entirely by seeds. Annual 
weeds should be destroyed before the seeds are ripe. 
Most such weeds produce a large number of seeds. The 
farmer who plows seed-bearing weeds tmder after the 
seeds are formed is preparing a large crop of weeds for 
the next season. The seeds of some of these plants will 
live underground for many years, ready to sprout when 
conditions are right. Deep plowing to kill these seeds 
only helps them sprout. Researchers at Michigan State 
University have found that some weed seeds live for 
more than 70 years. Among the common annual weeds 
are crab grass, ragweed, and wild mustard. 

Biennials are strong in root as well as seed. A good 
example of a biennial is the bull thistle, or purple thistle 
(see Thistle). The young plant begins to grow in the 
spring, and the following season it produces a stalk 3 or 
4 feet high. This stalk bears thousands of seeds. The 
young plants should be destroyed. But they will grow 
again unless they arc cut off beneath the surface deep 
enough to destroy the roots. 

Perennials are the most troublesome weeds of all. 
They have spreading roots or underground stems that 
keep producing new plants. These plants also produce 
many seeds. Some of the worst perennial weeds are 
Canada thistle, bindweed or wild morning-glory, couch 



Wedgwood Jasper Vase with Greek Design 



Wedgwood Dinnerware with the Famous Raised Grape Design 

Josiah Wedgwood &amp; Sons. Inc. 




145 



WEED, THURLOW 

grass or quack grass, sorrel, perennial sow thistle, and 
leafv spurge. The way to control these weeds is to keep 
the stalks from growing, so the roots can get no nourish- 
ment for two or three seasons. Then die roots die, and 
the weed is destroyed. One way to do this is to turn the 
land into pasture. 

Weed Control. One of the best ways to fight weeds is 
to cultivate the ground early and constantly. Another 
is to burn over weedy ground before plowing. .Still an- 
other method is to mow roadsides, vacant lots, and all 
other uncultivated lands before the weed seeds ripen. 
The United .States Department of Agriculture will send 
bulletins on weed control to anyone who asks for them. 

A herbicide is a chemical used to kill plants. .Some 
herbicides, like common salt, kill nearly all kinds of 
plants; others are much more selective. One of these is 
2,4-D, a synthetic chemical related to a normal plant 
hormone. This selective spray is much more poisonous 
to broad-leaved plants than to grasses. Chemists and 
manufacturers of sprays have developed sprays so selec- 
tive they will act on only one species of a weed. 

Poison sprays work better against annual weeds than 
against plants with stubborn underground parts. For 
information about the use of herbicides, write to a state 
agricultitral experiment station, or to the United .States 
Department of Agriculture. Arthur Cro.nijuist 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Common Weeds 

Amaranth Horsetail Ragweed 

Beggarweed Indian Mallow Saint John's-Wort 

Bindweed Jimson Weed Smartweed 

Brome Grass Knotgrass Solanum 

Burdock Lambs-Quarters Sorrel 

Canada Thistle Locoweed Sow Thistle 

Cinquefoil Lupine Spurge Family 

Cocklebur Milkweed Stickseed 

Compass Plant Mullein Teasel 

Dandelion Nettle Thisde 

Dock Parsnip Toadflax 

Dodder Pigweed Tumbleweed 

Glasswort Plantain Viper's Bugloss 

Goldenrod Poison Ivy Water Hyacinth 

Grass Poison Oak Wild Carrot 

Gromwell Pokeweed Witchweed 

Hemlock Purslane 

Unclassified 
Gardening (Cultivating the Soil) Weed Killer 

WEED, THURLOW ( 1 797- 1 882), was an American jour- 
nalist and political leader. He became one of the 
leaders of the Whig and Republican parties, and was 
largely responsible for the election of two Whig presi- 
dents, William Henry Harrison and Zachary Taylor. 
His support of William S. Seward, U.S. .Secretary of 
State, led to Weed's appointment as a commissioner to 
England and France at the outset of the Civil War. 
Weed was born at Cairo, N.Y. In 1830 he established 
the Albany (N.Y.) Evening Journal. John e. Drewry 

WEED KILLER. The gardener or farmer may use any 
of several methods for killing weeds — chemicals, heat, 
machines, or hand weeding. A chemical that kills weeds 
is a herbicide. .Some herbicides, called soil slerilants, keep 
anything from growing in the soil. They are used when 
there are many weeds with roots deep in the soil. This 
type of herbicide includes many salts, like common salt, 



borax, and sodium arsenite. Plants cannot grow in 
treated soil until the rain has washed out the chemical. 

Sprays for killing weeds have been known since the 
late 1800"s. One spray that has long been used is a solu- 
tion of iron sulfate, made from two pounds of the chemi- 
cal to a gallon of water. Dilute sulfuric acid will kill most 
weeds, except upright or waxy ones. It is most useful on 
large areas, like farms. Sodium or calcium chlorate can 
be used as a spray or a dusting powder. It works best on 
weeds with rather large leaves. .Some oils kill all plants. 
Others will not harm carrots, celen.', and parsley. 

A yellow coal-tar dye known as sinax kills only annual 
weeds with broad leaves, and does not harm grass. It 
also destroys pollen and insects. .Some weeds can resist 
the chemical as they grow older. Sinox has been used 
with crops of grain, flax, peas, and potatoes. .Ammonium 
sulfamate is a general (nonselective) weed killer that 
kills by contact. In some cases it is absorbed through the 
leaves of plants and carried to the roots. Ammonium 
sulfamate is effective for the control of woody plants 
such as poison ivy, chokecherry, and many weed trees. 

In 1944, chemists reported that two plant hormones, 
called 2,4-D and 2,4, 5-T, could kill weeds. The letters 
stand for the chemical names 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic 
acid, and 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid. E.xactly 
how weed-killing hormones bring about the death of 
plants is not well understood, but it is known that they 
cause plants to use up their food reserves. The 2,4-D is 
selective in its action. It kills most broad-leaved plants, 
but not grasses, when properly applied. This action 
makes it useful on lawns, golf courses, and pastures, 
and with corn and sugar cane. It should not be used 
on flowers. The 2,4-D can also be mixed in the soil 
to kill the weed seeds before planting other seeds. It 
disappears after a few months and does not ruin the soil. 

In 1 954. scientists discovered another efl"ective chemi- 
cal weed killer called datapon. Unlike 2,4-D, dalapon 
kills grassy weeds. Thus a wide range of weed control 
can be supplied by using 2,4-D and dalapon. 

For killing weeds by heat, the farmer now has a ma- 
chine called the Siz^-weeder. Flame weeding works when 
the crop has more fiber than the weed, and can resist the 

heat. William C. Beaver 

See also Insecticide; Weed. 

WEEK is a division of time which includes seven 
days. We do not know exactly how this man-made 
division of time came into being, but the ancient 
Hebrews were among the first to use it. The book of 
Genesis in the Bible says that the world was created in 
six days and the seventh day, or Sabbath, was a day of 
rest and worship. 

The ancient Egyptians named each day of the week 
for one of the planets. They considered the seventh day 
merely as a day of rest and play. Among the later Ro- 
mans, the seven days of the week were named after the 
sun, moon, and five planets which were then known. 
Each day was considered sacred to the Roman god who 
was associated with that planet. The days were known 
as .Sun's-day, Moon's-day, Mars'-day, and so on. This 
system was used about the beginning of the Christian 
Era. The English names for the days Tuesday, Wednes- 
day, Thursday, and Friday were derived from the names 

of Norse gods. Paul Sollenberger 

See also separate articles in World Book on each 
day of the week. 



146 



WEEKS, SINCLAIR (1893- ), an American busi- 
nessman, served as Secretary of Commerce from 1953 to 
1958 under President Dwight D. Eisenhower. Weeks 
served in the army in World War I, then began his busi- 
ness career as a bank clerk. In 1928, he became vice- 
president of Reed and Barton Corp., silversmiths. He 
later served as board chairman. Weeks also served as 
Republican national committee treasurer from 1941 to 
1944, and national finance committee chairman from 
1950 to 1952. Weeks was born in Newton, Mass. He 
was graduated from Harvard University in 1914. 

WEEMS, MASON LOCKE (1759-1825), an American 
Episcopal clergyman, writer, and bookseller, wrote the 
first popular biography of Washington, The Life and 
Memorable Actions of George Washington, about 1800. It 
includes many tales which Weems apparently invented, 
such as the one about Washington chopping down a 
cherry tree. Parson Weems wrote a number of biog- 
raphies and moral tracts, and was one of the most 
picturesque of early American writers. He was born in 
Anne Arundel County, Maryland. Weems was one of 
the first two Americans to be ordained as an Episco- 
palian minister. Arvid Shulenberger 
WEEMS, P.V.H. See Navigation (Red-Letter Dates). 
WEEVIL, \l'EE v'l, is the name of many kinds of 
beetles with a long snout. They are among the worst in- 
sect pests that attack farm crops. The cotton boll weevil, 
commonly called the boll weevil, probably causes more 
loss than any other insect pest in the United States. The 
name weevil is also given to the grubs, or larvae, of these 
beetles. The larva is usually the form that does the 
damage. 

Adult weevils are sometimes so small that they are 
hard to see. They have long snouts that may be longer 
than the rest of the body. These insects lay their eggs in 
the stalk, seed, or fruit of the plant. The grub then feeds 
on these plant parts, causing great damage. 

Besides the boll weevil, there are other kinds that 
attack grain, fruit, clover, and alfalfa. The granary weevil 
is harmful to wheat. It lays its eggs on the wheat after 
it is stored, and the grubs 
burrow into the grain. The 
rice weevil destroys rice and 
other cereals in the same 
way. The alfalfa weevil first 
appeared in Salt Lake City 
about 1904. It has spread 
rapidly, and causes great 

The Rice Weevil (left) 
Alfalfa Weevil (below) 

E. O. Easig; USDA 





WEIGHT, TABLES OF 

loss in alfalfa-growing regions every year. This insect is 
less than j inch long, and is tawny red. It came to the 
United States from Europe and Asia. In its native home 
it has many insect enemies which eat the weevil and its 
eggs, and keep it in check. The United States Depart- 
ment of Agriculture has imported large numbers of 
weevil enemies. It has spread them among the weevils 
to keep down the damage to alfalfa. 

There are also many kinds of fruit weevils. The plum 
curcnlio is the most important of the group that attacks 
plums and cherries. The larvae of these insects feed on 
the fruit, which falls off or becomes wormy. 

Scientific Classification. Weevils belong to the order 
Coleoplera, family Curculiomdae. R. E. Blackwelder 

See also Boll Weevil; Grain Weevil. 

WEFT. See Weaving (Plain Weave). 

WEHRMACHT. See World War II (Mobilization). 

WEIDENREICH, VYdunryk, FRANZ (1873-1948), was 
a German-American physical anthropologist. He gained 
fame for his studies of the fossils representing Sinanthro- 
pus pekinemis (Peking Man), and for demonstrating the 
relationship of this early man to Java Man and other 
Pithecanthropus forms. He wrote Apes, Giants, and Man 
(1946), an important book on fossil man. Weidenreich 
was born at Edenkoben, Germany. David b. Stout 

WEIDLEIN, WTDE lyne, EDWARD RAY (1887- ), 
an American chemical engineer, became noted for his 
ability to organize and direct industrial research. From 
1921 to 1951 he served as director of the Mellon Insti- 
tute of Industrial Research. Because of the knowledge 
Weidlein acquired through research at the institute, the 
government called on him to handle many problems, 
stich as the synthetic-rubber program during World War 
II. He was born at Augusta, Kans., and was educated 
at the University of Kansas. Herbert s. rhinesmth 

WEIGHING SCALE. See Scale, Weighing. 

WEIGHT, wayt, is the measure of the force with which 
an object is pulled toward the center of the earth by 
gravity. The farther an object is from the center of the 
earth, the less it weighs. To say that a body has a weight 
of five pounds, simply means that the earth pulls on it 
to that extent. An object weighs more at the poles than 
it does at the equator because the poles are slightly 
closer to the earth's center than is the equator. 

A quantity of iron that weighs 1 ,000 pounds at the 
equator will weigh 1 ,005 pounds at either of the earth's 
poles. Moving the iron closer to the earth's center has 
increased the force of gravity on the iron. Thus, the 
iron has gained weight. The iron itself has undergone 
no change. It would contain the same number of mole- 
cules no matter where it was placed. This constant 
amount of matter is known as the object's mass, and 
always remains the same for the same object. 

There are several systems of weight units. Pounds 
and ounces are units of avoirdupois weight. The gram 
is the basic unit of weight in the metric system. For a 
complete list of units used in the various systems, see 
Weights and Measures (Weight). Robert f. Paton 

See also Gravitation; Mass; Scale, Weighing. 

WEIGHT, ATOMIC. See Atom (Atomic Weight). 

WEIGHT, MOLECULAR. See Molecule. 

WEIGHT, TABLES OF. For boys and giris, see Grov\'th. 
For men and women, see Weight Control. 



147 




Schneitler. Black Star 

WEIGHT CONTROL. Many persons weigh more than 
they should. Doctors call them overweight. When a per- 
son is extremely fat, doctors call the condition obesity. 
Anyone who is about 15 or more pounds heavier than 
his desirable weight is considered ovenveight. People 
who are more than 30 or 40 pounds heavier than they 
should be are considered obese. 

What Is Desirable Weight? 

Desirable weight is an individual thing. It may be 
described as the weight at which a person both looks and 
feels his best. Desirable weight also depends on a per- 
son's height, bone structure, and muscular development. 

Because no two people are alike, weight tables cannot 
show with complete accuracy exactly what ever\- indi- 
vidual should weigh. The tables shown here are given 
as a guide rather than as a rigid standard to which 
ever\'one should conform. They show desirable weights 
for men and women at age 25 and over. By this age, 
most people have stopped growing. Aiiei a person is 
fully grown and has reached his best weight, he should 
not gain or lose much for the rest of his life. It used to be 
considered inevitable and normal for people to get 



heavier toward middle age. .■\uthorities know now that 
gaining weight is not a normal part of getting" older. 
It is not healthful, and not necessar\-. 

C:hildren and young persons who are still growing 
rapidly cannot measure themselves accurately against a 
table of averages. Physical growth takes place at such 
widely different rates in different individuals that two 
healthy young persons, several years different in age, 
may measure the same in any one or more body dimen- 
sion. For example, it is not unusual to find a boy of 10 
and a boy of 1 5 who weigh the same. Doctors generally 
agree that a simple record of height and weight should 
be kept for each child. Too great a gain in height or 
%\'eight, or failure to gain, over a period of several 
months, is a signal to see a physician. 

What Makes Overweight Undesirable? Overweight 
is a danger signal, particularly for those over 40 years 
of age. .Studies of life-insurance figures show that over- 
weight persons are more likely to develop diabetes, 
heart disease, high blood pressure, and other life- 
shortening conditions earlier, and to die younger, than 
persons whose weight is normal. Persons who are over- 
weight make poor surgical risks, and have lowered 
resistance to infection. 

Life is much easier in many ways for persons who are 
not too fat. They usually feel and look better. They are 
likely to live longer. They tend to suffer less from back- 
aches, foot troubles, fatigue, and other discomforts. 
Normal weight is worth any eff'ort it takes to reach and 
keep it — worth it in terms of ever%day comfort and of a 
healthier, longer life. 

What Makes a Person Fat? Most people are fat 
simply because they eat too much. This does not 
necessarily mean that they stuff themselves with large 
quantities of food. It does mean that they take in more 
Calories than their bodies can use. A Calorie is a measure 
of the heat energy which the body can get from a certain 
amount of food (see Calorie). It is often surprisingly 
easy to take in too many Calories, particularly for a 
person who has poor eating habits. 

.Some people blame their overweight on tnetabolism 
(the rate at which their bodies use energy) or on glands 
(see Met.\bolism). In a few cases, poorly functioning 
glands contribute to overweight. But even then, the 
overweight patient under a physician's treatment for 









DESIRABLE 


WEIGHTS AT AGE 


25 


OR OVER 


» 












[Weight in Pound 


s According 


to Frame 


—In 


Indoor 


Clothing) 






MEN 

(With 
l-in 

Feet 


HEIGHT 

hoes on — 
h heelsl 

Inches 


SMALL 
FRAME 


MEDIUM 
FRAME 


LARGE 
FRAME 


WOMENt HEIGHT 

(With shoes on — 

2-inch heels) 
Feet Inches 


SMALL 
FRAME 


MEDIUM 
FRAME 


LARGE 
FRAME 


5 


2 


112-120 


118-129 


126-141 


4 




10 




92-98 


96-107 


104-119 


5 


3 


115-123 


121 133 


129 144 


4 




11 




94 101 


98-110 


106-122 


5 


4 


1 18-126 


124 136 


132 148 


5 









96 104 


101-113 


109-125 


5 


5 


121-129 


127-139 


135-152 


5 




1 




99-107 


104-116 


112-128 


5 


6 


124 133 


130 143 


138-156 


5 




2 




102-110 


107-119 


115-131 


5 


7 


128 137 


134 147 


142-161 


5 




3 




105-113 


110-122 


118-134 


5 


8 


132-141 


138-152 


147-166 


5 




4 




108 116 


113-126 


121-138 


5 


9 


136-145 


142-156 


151-170 


5 




5 




11 1-1 19 


116-130 


125-142 


5 


10 


140 150 


146 160 


155-174 


5 




6 




114-123 


120-135 


129-146 


5 


11 


144-154 


150-165 


159-179 


5 




7 




118 127 


124-139 


133-150 


6 





148 158 


154-170 


164-184 


5 




8 




122-131 


128-143 


137-154 


6 


I 


152-162 


158 175 


168-189 


5 




9 




126-135 


132-147 


141-158 


6 


2 


156-167 


162-180 


173 194 


5 




10 




130 140 


136-151 


145-163 


6 


3 


160 171 


167-185 


178-199 


5 




1 1 




134 144 


140-155 


149-168 


6 


4 164-175 172-190 

rhesc tables are based on medico-actuartal studies of 


182-204 

hundreds of 111 


6 









138-148 


144-159 


153-173 


, 


tFoi 
ausands of 


Sirls 
insui 


between IS 
ed men and 


and 25. subtract 
%onien. Courtesy 


X pound for each j 
Metropolitan Lift? 


ear under 25. 
Insurance Co. 



148 



glandular disorders can lose weight when his food intake 
is regulated. 

What many people do not realize, howe\er, is that 
the body's energy requirements usually change after age 
30 or 40. As a person gets older, his metabolism slows 
down and he needs fewer Calories to maintain his 
weight. The trouble is that eating habits usually stay 
exactly the same, while physical activity often decreases 
in middle age. 

Some people blame heredity for over\veight. Heredity 
does detennine the t\pe of body build a person has, and 
probably his glandular structure. But when persons from 
overweight families change their eating habits, it has 
been proved that they, too, can lose weight. 

How to Lose Weight 

Only a physician has the necessary skill and equip- 
ment to decide how much, how fast, and \\ith what 
treatment a person should lose weight. He will study 
\"our physical condition, degree of ovenxeight, and 
individual living habits in order to work out an effective, 
safe reducing plan. What benefits one person may harm 
another. Therefore, you should undertake a reducing 
program only under medical supervision. 

Anyone who really wants to get rid of excess pound- 
age can do it. Many persons have, with determination 
and persistence. Desire and will power are "musts" in 
anv reducing program. 

The Body Needs Food. Awake or asleep, the body 
needs energ\' for ever\' breath, every heartbeat, e\'er\- 
acti\'ity of living. When a person eats only enough to 
supply the energy he uses, his weight sta\s the same. If 
he takes in more Calories than he needs, the body stores 
the e.\cess as fat. If his food adds up to fewer Calories 
than he needs, his body takes the extra energy out of its 
storehouse of fat, and a loss in weight occurs. Reducing 
diets are based on this simple principle: takmg in fewer 
Calorics than needed, to force the body to use its stored fat. 

Foods \'ary in the number of Calories they contain. As 
most persons know, fats of all kinds have the most 
Calories. One tablespoon of butter, for example, has in 
it about as many Calories as a good slice of lean roast 
beef, or a cup of beets, or a quarter pound of cod steak. 
Sugars, alcohol, and starches are the next richest source 
of Calories. Starches include cereals, flour and every- 
thing made with flour, potatoes, peas, beans, and corn. 
When Calories must be cut down to make the body use 
stored fat, alcoholic drinks and foods rich in fats, 
sugars, and starches are the first to be restricted. 

However, no one can lose weight safely by counting 
Calories alone. For good health, food must supply 
everyone — young and old alike — with more than 
C'alories. The body is constantly repairing and renew- 
ing itself. New cells are always growing to replace those 
worn out in doing work. In babies, children, and young 
people, cell-making is going on at top speed, because 
actual growth is taking place. As in any building 
process, the right materials are needed. The body's most 
essential building and maintenance materials are found 
in proteins. Foods richest in proteins include milk, 
meat, fish, poultry, cheese, and eggs. 

\itamins and minerals also are necessary for health. 
Some of these are found in the same foods which are 
rich in protein. Others are found in grain products, 
fruits, vegetables, and fats. 



WEIGHT CONTROL 

Daily Diet Needs. To insure a well-balanced diet, 
made up of protective foods containing enough pro- 
teins, vitamins, and minerals, ever&gt;-one should eat the 
following foods daily: 

Milk — 2 or more glasses for adults; 4 or more for 
children, and for expectant and nursing mothers. 

Vegetables — 2 or more ser\'ings, green or yellow. 

Fruits — 2 servings, 1 a citrus fmit or tomato. 

Eggs — 1: at least 3 to 5 a week. 

Meat, Fish, Poultry, or Cheese — 1 or more servings 
(dried legumes may be substituted occasionally). 

Cereal and Bread — 2 servings, whole-grain or en- 
riched. 

Fats — 1 to 3 tablespoons. (In reducing diets, some 
of die fat allowance may be in the cream in 
whole milk.) 

Persons who are not overweight can add what they 
like to this list in other foods and second helpings, to 
make up their caloric requirements. Persons who want 
to lose weight can add little or nothing. 

The Body's Need for Exercise. Every- healthy person 
needs some exercise. Daii\' physical exertion is good 
for muscle tone and circulation. It also helps to relieve 
the nervous tension many people pile up at work. 

Regular exercise can help in a reducing program, if 
it is not carried to die point of increasing hunger. The 
more active a person is, the more Calories he needs to 
burn. But. for the overweight individual, exercise can 
never replace eating less. A person would have to walk 
about 5 miles to use up the Calories in one chocolate 
sundae. He would have to saw wood for an hour or so 
to offset a piece of apple pie. or walk about a mile to 
work off two graham cigckers. Obviously, it is simpler 
to avoid eating the sundae, the pie, or the crackers. 

The decision about exercising w-hile losing weight 
should be left to the physician supervising the reducing 
program. The kind and amount of extra physical 
activity that he advises will depend on the person's 
age, physical condition, and previous habits. For chil- 
dren and young patients, he will probably advise much 
exercise and active sports. For older persons, he may 
not prescribe anything more strenuous than walking. 
For persons with heart or circulatory conditions, he 
may caution against any exercise. The necessity for 
tailoring the treatment to the individual in this way 
is one of the reasons why a reducing program should 
be undertaken only imder medical supervision. 

What About Short Cots? No one who has taken on 
the job of losing weight will say that the self-denial 
necessary is pleasant. Is there an easier way? \Vhai 
about drugs, steam baths, massage, or other methods? 

.\ny dmg is dangerous if it increases the body's rate 
of burning Calories enough to cause weight reduction 
without dieting. One drug, released in the early 1930's 
without medical sanction, "worked," but it also caused 
deafness, blindness, and paralysis, before authorities 
withdrew it from the market. Even if drugs are pre- 
scribed by a physician, they will be used in addition 
to — not in place of — a diet. Steam baths and massage 
are good for the circulation but they do not help a 
person to lose weight. The only way to reduce safely 

is to eat less. William P. Shep.\rd 

See also Diet; Food (Food and Diet); Xutrition. 




Weight-Lifting Contestants try to hoist heavy bar-bell 
weights above their heads. OfFicial rules require the lifter to 
extend his arms completely or the lift will not be ruled valid. 

WEKJHT LIFTING is a competitive sport that is also 
frequently used to develop the body and to help athletes 
prepare for competition in other sports. In weight-lifting 
contests, the participants lift heavy bar bells, or dumb- 
bells. They compete with persons of about their same 
weight, in classes roughly corresponding to the various 
weight divisions for bo.xers. 

Three types of lifts are included in Olympic competi- 
tion. These are also most common in .\mateur .'Athletic 
Union (AAU) competition. All involve the use of both 
hands. They are the military press, the clean and jerk, 
and the snatch. In the military press, the contestant lifts 
the bar bell from the floor, and rests it against his 
chest. He then waits for the referee's signal and lifts 
the bar bell as high as he can. The clean and jerk is 
similar, except that the contestant does not have to 
wait for the referee's signal. In the snatch, the con- 
testant lifts the bar bell in one continuous motion. 

Ancient pictures show men with dtimbbells in their 
hands. Scientific studies of strength were conducted as 
early as the IGOO's. More recent studies show that 
weight lifting improves health and betters performances 

in sports. T. K. Cureton, Jr. 

See also Dumbbell. 
WEIGHTLESSNESS. .See Space Travel. 



WEIGHTS 

AND 

MEASURES 



--.f 



WEIGHTS AND MEASURES are the standards used to 
find the size of things. People in the United .States, 
C:anada, and other English-speaking countries use stand- 
ards that belong to the English system of measurement. But 
many units differ in the various English-speaking coun- 
tries. Tables in this article marked United States belong 
to the English system, but apply only to the United 
States and Canada, unless otherwise indicated. Most 
other countries and most scientists use the metric system. 
Tables in this article marked Metric System belong to 
this system. For a complete discussion of this kind of 
measurement, see Metric .S^■STEM. 

Weights and measures form one of the most important 
parts of our life today. Many weights and measures have 
had a fascinating history. For a complete discussion of 
this subject, see Me.\surement. 

Converting English Units to Metric Units 

Converting from English to metric units and from 
metric to English units is not difficult. .Suppose you 
want to change English units to metric units. Multiply 
the number of English units — inches, feet, pounds, and 
so on — by the number of metric units contained in one 
of the English unit. For example, change 22 miles to 
kilometers. Multiply 22, the number of miles, by 1 .6093, 
the number of kilometers that make up one mile: 
22 X 1 .6093 = 35.4046. So 22 English-unit miles equal 
35.4046 metric-unit kilometers. 

You change metric units to English units the same 
way. Multiply the number of metric units — meters, 
grams, liters, and so on — by the number of English units 
contained in one of the metric unit. For example, change 
14 ares to square feet. One are contains 119.6 square 
yards. P'irst, multiply 14, the number of ares, by 1 19.6, 
the number of square yards that make up one are: 
14 X 119.6 = 1,674.4. Second, one square yard con- 
tains nine square feet. Multiply 1,674.4 by 9: 1,674.4 X 
9 = 15,069.6. So 14 ares equal 15,069.6 square feet. 

Linear Measure 

Linear measure deals with only one dimension — 
length. Lengths or distances are measured on a straight 
line from one point to another. 



150 




Weights and Measures offect 
everyday life in a thousand different 
ways. A housewife uses linear measure 
to cut material for new drapes. A 
butcher uses avoirdupois weight to sel 
a roast. And a fruitgrower uses dry 
capacity measure to ship his apples. 



Linear Measure — Metric Sysfem 

(United States) 

1 angsfrom (A.) = 0.000000004 in. 

10 A. =1 milli- 
micron (mM.)= 0.00000003937 in. 
1,000 m^. =1 micron (m.) = 0.00003937 in. 
1,000 /x. =1 milli- 
meter (mm.) = 0.03937 in. 

10 mm. = 1 centi- 
meter (cm.) = 0.3937 in. 

10 cm. = 1 deci- 
meter (dm.) = 3.937 in. 

10 dm. =1 meter (m.) = 39.37 in. 

10 m. =1 deca- 
meter (dkm.) = 393.7 in. 

10dkm.= l hecto- 
meter (hm.) = 328.0833 ft. 

lOhm. =1 kilometer (km.) = 0.62137mi. 

10 km. = 1 myriameter 

(mym.) = 6.2137 mi. 




WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 



Linear Measure — United States 



(Metric) 



1 inch (in.) = 2.54 cm. 

12 in. =1 foot (ft.) = 30.48 cm. 

3 ft. =1 yard (yd.) = 0.9144 m. 

5^ yd. = 1 rod (rd.) = 5.0292 m. 

or 1 perch (p.) 
or 1 pole (p.) 

40rd.,orimi. = 1 furlong (fur.) = 201.168 m. 
5,280 ft. = 1 statute mile (mi.) = 1 .6093 km. 

3 mi. =1 league = 4.8280 km. 

Linear Measure — Surveyor's, or Gunter's Chain 

(United States) 



lOOmmS. 
100 cm2. 
100 dm2. 
100 m2. 



100 li. 
10 ch. 
8 fur. 



1 link (li.) = 7.92 in. 

= 1 chain (ch.) = 66 ft. 

= 1 furlong (fur.) = 660 ft. 

= 1 statute mile (mi.) = 5,280 ft. 



Linear Measure — Engineer's Chain 

(United States) 

1 link (li.) = 1 ft. 

100 li. = 1 chain (ch.) = 100 ft. 

52.8 ch. = 1 mile (mi.) = 5,280 ft. 



Linear Measure — Nautical 



1 span 

8 spans = 1 fathom (f m.) 

120 fathoms = 1 cable's length 

10 cables' lengths = 1 nautical mile 
or 1 sea mile 
or 1 geo- 
graphic mile 

1 nautical mile 
or 1 inter- 
national mile 
3 nautical miles = 1 league 

60 nautical miles = 1 degree 



Square Measure — Metric System 

(United States) 

^ square millimeter (mm'.) = 0.002 sq. in. 
= 1 square centimeter (cm'.) = 0. 1 549 sq. in. 
= 1 square decimeter (dm'.) = 1 5.499 sq. in. 
= 1 square meter (m'.) = 1 ,549 sq. in. 

= 1 square decameter (dkm'.)= 1 19.6 sq. yd. 
100dkm2.= 1 square hectometer (hm'.) = 2.47 10 A. 
100hm2. =1 square kilometer (km'.) =247. 104 A. 

or 
0.3861 sq. mi. 

Land Measure 

1 centiare (ca.) = 1 ,549 sq. in. 

100 ca. = Tare (a.) =119.6sq. yd. 

100a. =1 hectare (ha.) =2.4710 A. 

100 ha. = 1 square kilometer (km'.) = 247. 104 A. 

or 
0.3861 sq. mi. 

Square Measure — United States 

(Metric) 

1 square inch (sq. in.) = 6.4516 cm^. 
144 sq. in. = 1 square foot (sq. ft.) = 0.0929 m^. 
9 sq. ft. =1 square yard (sq. yd.)= 0.8361 m^. 
30J sq. yd. = 1 square rod (sq. rd.) = 25.293 m'-. 
160 sq. rd. = 1 acre (A.) = 0.4047 ha. 

640 A. =1 square mile (sq. mi.) = 258.9998 ha. 

or 2.5899 km'. 



(United States) Square Measure— Surveyor's 



= 9 in. 

6 ft. 

720 ft. 
= 6,080.20 ft. 
or 1.1516 
statute mi. 
(Former Value) 
= 6,076.10333 ft. 

(JVew Value) 
3.45 

statute mi. 
= 69.169 

statute mi. 



Square Measure 

Square measure deals with two dimensions — length 
and width (see SquARE). It expresses the area of a sur- 
face. .Square measure uses many of the units used in 
linear measure. In the metric system, a small figure 2 
placed to the right and above the abbreviation shows 
that the measurement is squared. 



(United States) 

1 square link (sq. li.) = 62.73 sq. in. 
625 sq. li. = 1 square pole (sq. p.) = 30.25 sq. yd. 

16 sq. p. = 1 square chain (sq. ch.)= 484 sq. yd. 

10 sq. ch. = 1 acre (A.) =4,840 sq. yd. 

640 A. =1 section (sec.) = 1 sq. mi. 

36 sec. = 1 township (tp.) = 36 sq. mi. 

Square Measure — Electric Wire 

(United States) 

1 circular mil =0.000000785 sq. in. 
IMCM =0.000785 sq. in. 

: 1 circular inch = 0.785 sq. in. 



1,000 cir. mils 
1,000 MCM 



Cubic and Capacity Measure 

Cubic measure deals with three dimensions — length, 
breadth, and depth (see Cube). It e.xpresses such quan- 






tities as the amount 6f space in a box, the amount of 
wood in a block, or the volume of air in a rubber ball. 
Cubic measure uses many units used in linear and 
square measure. In the metric system, a small figure 3 
placed to the right and above the abbreviation shows 



152 



that the measurement is cubed. Capacity measure deals 
with volumes of certain kinds of materials, for example, 
liquids or grains. 

Cubic Measure — Metric System 

{United States) 

1 cubic milli- 
meter (mm3.) =0.00006 cu. in. 

1,000 mm'. = 1 cubic centi- 
meter (cm^.) =0.0610 cu. in. 

1,000 cm^. =1 cubic deci- 
meter (dm3.) = 0.0353 cu. ft. 

1,000 dm3. =1 cubic meter (m'.) = 1.3079 cu. yd. 

1,000 m3. =1 cubic deca- 
meter (dkm3.) =1,307.9 cu. yd. 

1,000 dkm3.= l cubic tiecto- 

meter (hm^.) = 1 ,307,900 cu. yd. 



Cubic Measure — United States 



1,728 cu. in. 

27 cu. ft. 



1 cubic inch (cu. in.) 
1 cubic foot (cu. ft.) 
1 cubic yard (cu. yd.) 



(Metric) 

= 16.387 cm'. 
= 0.0283 m'. 
= 0.7646 m'. 



Capacity Measure — Metric System 



1 milliliter (ml.) = 

10 ml. =1 centiliter (cl.) = 

10 cl. = 1 deciliter (dl.) = 

10 dl. = 1 liter (I.) 



10 1. =1 decaliter (dkl.) 
lOdkl. = 1 hectoliter (hi.) 
10 hi. =1 kiloliter (kl.) 



{United States) 

0.0610 cu. in. 

0.6102 cu. in. 

6.1025 cu. in. 
= 61.025 cu. in. 
or 1 .057 qt. (liquid) 
or 0.908 qt. (dry) 
= 610.25 cu. in. 
= 6,102.50 cu. in. 
= 35.315 cu. ft. 
or 264.178 gal. (liquid) 
or 28.38 bu. (dry) 




Liquid Capacity Measure — United Stales 

{Metric) 

IgilKgi.) =7.219 cu. in. =0.1183 1. 

4gi. =lpint(pt.) =28.875 cu. in. =0.4732 1. 

2 pt. =1 quart (qt.) =57.75 cu. in. =0.9463 1. 

4qt. =1 gallon(gal.) = 231 cu. in. =3.7853 1. 

31.5gal.= l barrel (liquids) (bbl.) =119.24 1. 

42 gal. = 1 barrel (petroleum) (bbl.) =158.98 1. 



WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 

Liquid Capacity Measure — Great Britain and Canada 

1.2009 U.S. qt. = 1 imperial quart =69.3185 cu. in. 
1.201 U.S. gal. = 1 imperial gallon =277.420 cu. in. 




Dry Capacity Measure — United States 

{Metric) 

1 pint (pi.) =33.600 cu. in. =0.5506 1. 
2pt. =1 quart (qt.) =67.20 cu. in. =1.1012 1. 
Bqt. =1 peck(pk.) =537.61 cu. in. =8.8096 1. 
4 pk. =1 bushel(bu.) = 2, 1 50.42 cu. in. = 35.2383 1 . 

1 barrel (bbl.) = 7,056 cu. in. = 1 15.62 1. 

Dry Capacity Measure — Great Britain and Canada 



1.0320 U.S. qt. 
1.032 U.S. bu. 



: 1 dry quart =69.354 cu. in. 

■■ 1 imperial bushel = 2,219.360 cu. in. 



Capacity Measure — Household 



ifl- 



oz. 
oz. 



1 teaspoon 

3 teaspoons = 1 tablespoon = i A 
16 tablespoons = 1 cup = 8 fl. oz. 

2 cups = 1 pint 

2 pints = 1 quart 

4 quarts = 1 gallon 



Capacity Measure — Shipping 



1 barrel bulk 
8 bairrels bulk= 1 shipping ton 

or 1 measurement ton 
or 1 freight ton 

1 displacement ton 
1 register ton 

Apothecaries' Fluid Measure 



{United States) 

= 5 cu. ft. 

= 40 cu. ft. 



= 35 cu. ft. 
= 100cu. ft. 



{Metric) 



1 minim or drop (min. or ■ni) = 0.0616 ml. 
60 min. = 1 fluid dram (fl. dr. or/5) =3.6966 ml. 

8 fl. dr.= 1 fluid ounce (fl. oz. or/3) =0.0295 1. 
1 6 fl. oz. = 1 pint (O.) = 0.4732 1 . 

8 0. =1 gallon (C.) =3.7853 1. 



WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
Wood Measure — Metric System 



1 millistere (ms.) 
10 ms. = 1 centistere (cs.) 
10 cs. = 1 decistere (ds.) 
10 ds. =1 stere (s.) 

10 s. =1 decastere (dks.) 
10 dks. = 1 hectostere (hs.) 



{United States) 

= 0.0353 cu. ft. 
= 0,3531 cu. ft. 
= 3.5314 cu. ft. 
= 1.3079 cu. yd. 
or 0.2759 cord 
= 13.079 cu. yd. 
= 130.8 cu. yd. 



Wood Measure — United States 

{Metric) 

144 cu. in. =1 board foot (bd. ft.) = .00236 m' or s^ 

(I'x I'x 1") 
16 cu. ft. = 1 cord foot (cd. ft.) = .4528 m^ or s' 

(4'x4'x 1') 
8 cd. ft. = 1 cord (cd.) = 3.625 m^ or s^ 

(4' X 4' X 8') 

Weight 

Weight measures deal with the heaviness of various 
materials (see Weight). Avoirdupois weight measures 
ordinary materials. Troy weight measures precious 
metals, such as gold and silver, and gems. Apothecaries^ 
weight measures drugs and medicines. All Uiree weight 
systems — avoirdupois, troy, and apothecaries' — use the 
same basic unit — the grain. 

Metric System Weight 

{Avoirdupois) 

1 milligram (mg.) = 0.0154 gr. 

10 mg. = 1 centigram (eg.) = 0. 1543 gr. 

10 eg. = 1 decigram (dg.) = 1.5432 gr. 

10 dg. =lgram(g.) = 15.4323 gr. 

10 g. = 1 decagram (dkg.) = 0.3527 oz. 

10 dkg. = 1 hectogram (hg.) = 3.5274 oz. 

10 hg. = 1 kilogram (kg.) = 2.2046 1b. 

10 kg. = 1 myriagram (myg.) = 22.046 lb. 

10 myg. = 1 quintal (q.) = 220.46 lb. 

10 q. =1 metric ton (M.T.) = 2,204.62 lb. 



Avoirdupois Weight 

1 grain (gr.) 
27.343,75 gr.= l dram (dr.) 
16 dr. =1 ounce (oz.) 

16 oz. =1 pound (lb.) 



100 lb. = 1 hundredweight (cwt.) 

2,000 lb. = 1 short ton (s.t.) 



Special British Units 

141b. =1 stone (st.) 
1 1 2 lb. =1 hundredweight (cwt.) 
2,240 lb. = 1 long ton (l.t.) 



{Metric) 

= 0.0648 g. 
= 1.7718 g. 
= 28.3495 g. 
= 453.5924 g. 

or 

0.4536 kg. 
= 45.3592 kg. 
= 907.18 kg. 

or 

0.9072 M.T. 



6.35 kg. 
= 50.80 kg. 
= 1,016.05 kg. 

or 

1.01.60 M.T. 




Troy Weight 

(Metric) 

1 grain (gr.) = 0.0648 g. 

3.086 gr. = 1 carat (c.) = 0.2 g. 

24 gr. = 1 pennyweight (dwt.) = 1.55 g. 

20dwt. = 1 ounce (oi. t.) = 31.1035 g. 

12 oz. =1 pound (lb. t.) = 373.24 g. 

or 0.3732 kg. 



Apothecaries' Weight 



1 grain (gr.) 

20 gr. = 1 scruple (s. ap. or 3) 

3 s. ap. = 1 dram (dr. ap. or o) 
8 dr. ap. = 1 ounce (oz. ap. or o) 

12 oz. ap. = 1 pound (lb. ap. or lb) 



(Metric) 

0.0648 g. 

1.296 g. 

3.888 g. 
31.1035 g. 
373.24 g. 
or 
0.3732 kg. 



Circular and Angular Measure 



60 seconds 
60 minutes 
90 degrees 

4 quadrants 



1 second (") 
= 1 minute (') 
= 1 degree (°) 
= 1 quadrant 
or 1 right angle 
= 1 circumference 

Radians 



i.aaLoo o circle 
2 1 'e 6 circle 
rh circle 
J circle 

1 circle 



1° = 0.017454 radians (rod.) 
57.2958° == 1 radian 
360° = 2 TT radians 

Gunnery 

360° = 6,400 mils 

Counting Measure 

1 dozen (doz.) = 12 units 
12 doz. = 1 gross (gr.) = 144 units 
= 1 great gross = 1,728 units 



12 gr. 



Paper Measure 



24 or 25 sheets = 1 quire (qr.) 
20 quires = 1 ream (rm.) 
516 sheets = 1 perfect ream 
2 reams = 1 bundle (bdl.) 
5 bundles = 1 bale 



MISCELLANEOUS WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 

Assay Ton, used for testing ore, equals 29.167 grams. 

Bolt, used in measuring cloth, equals 120 feet. 

Butf, formerly used for liquids, equals 1 26 gallons. 

Caraf, Metric, used principally to weigh pearls, equals 
200 milligrams. 

Catty, used to measure tea and other materials in east- 
em Asia, weighs about U pounds. 

Chaldron, a British capacity measure, equals 36 bushels. 

Cubit, in the English system, is 18 inches. It is based on 
the length of the forearm. 

Ell, used in measuring cloth, equals 45 inches. 

Firkin, used to measure lard or butter, equals either 
about 9 imperial gallons or about 56 pounds. 

Fortnight is a period of 14 days. 

Hand, used to measure the height of horses, from the 
ground to the withers, equals 4 inches. 

Hogshead, used to measure liquids, equals 63 gallons. 

Kilderkin, used to measure liquids, equals 18 gallons. 

Knot is a speed of 1 nautical mile an hour. 

Line, used to measure buttons, is vt inch. 

Load, of earth or gravel, equals 1 cubic yard. 

Nail, used in Great Britain, equals 2.25 inches. 

Palm equals 3 or 4 inches. 

Perch, used for masonry, equals 24.75 cubic feet. 

Pipe, used to measure liquids, equals 126 gallons. 

Puncheon, used to measure liquids, equals 84 gallons. 

Quarter, used to measure grain, equals 25 pounds in 
the United States and 28 pounds in Great Bi-itain. 

Rood, used to measure land in Great Britain and some 
English-speaking countries, equals J acre. 

Score is a group of 20. 

Skein, used to measure yam, equals 360 feet. 

Square, used to measure floor or roofing material, is 
an area of 100 square feet. 

Tierce, used to measure liquids, equals 42 gallons. 

Tun, used to measure liquids, equals 252 gallons. 

Vara, used to measure land, equals 33| inches in 
Texas, 33 inches in California, and from 32 to 43 inches 
in Spain, Portugal, and Latin .\merican countries. 



12 points = 1 pi 



Printing Measure 

iro.x. tV or 0.0138 in. 



1 point = app 
= 1 Dica = approx - 



or 0.166 in. 



Measure of Time 

1 microsecond (/xsec.) = .000001 second 
= 1 millisecond (msec.) =.001 second 
= 1 second (sec.) = sToTTo hour 

= 1 minute (min.) =^ hour 

= 1 hour (hr.) 
= 1 day (da.) 
= 1 week (wk.) 
= 1 common lunar year (yr.) 
= 1 common solar year 
= 1 leap year 
= 1 decade 
= 1 century 
= 1 millennium 



For a complete discussion of the measurement of 
time, see Clock; Time. phu-up s. jones 

Related Articles. See Measurement with its list of Re- 
lated .Articles. .See also the following articles: 
Apothecaries' \Veight Metric System 

Avoirdupois National Bureau of 

International Bureau of Standards 

Weights and Measures Troy Weight 

Mechanical Unit Weight 



1 ,000 /isec. 


1 ,000 nisec. 


60 sec. 


60 min. 


24 hr. 


7 da. 


354 da. 


365 da. 


366 da. 


10 \T. 


100 \T. 


1,000 &gt;T. 



WEISMULLER, "JOHNNY," JOHN 

WEIGLE, LUTHER ALLAN. See Bible (The Accepted 
Protestant Versions in English). 

WEILL, vyl, KURT (1900-1950), was a German com- 
poser of music for the stage. His The Threepenny Opera 
(1928) is a jazz version of John Gay's The Beggar's Opera 
(1728). Bom in Dessau, Weill studied music from the 
age of 14. He conducted opera and concerts in West- 
phalia, and achieved success with his own opera. The 
Protagonist (1926). 

Weill left Germany in 1 933, and settled in the United 
States in 1935. There he wrote musicals and motion- 
picture scores, including Lady in the Dark, One Touch of 
]'ernis. and Dozen in the Valley. Halsey Stevens 

WEIMAR REPUBLIC. See Germany (The Weimar 
Republic). 

WEIMARANER is a hunting dog that originated in 
Weimar, Germany, in the 1800's. It is related to the 
German short-haired pointer. The Weimaraner's silver- 
gray or fawn-gray coat, and eyes, nose, and lips of 
matching color, give the dog a striking appearance. The 
dog has short fur, hound's ears, and a tail cropped to be 
about sLx inches long when the dog is full grown. The 
Weimaraner weighs 55 to 85 pounds and is about 24 
inches high. It has an unusually keen sense of smell and 
has been used for trailing criminals But it is best known 
for hunting game such as wolves, mountain lions, bears, 
and all types of birds. The Weimaraner is called the 
gray ghost because of its silent gait in hunting. 

The breed has made many obedience records. The 
dog has a pleasant disposition, and makes a good pet. 
Weimaraner clubs in Germany and the United States 
try to control ownership of this breed. William f. BRo^^-N 

See also Doc (color picture. Sporting Dogs). 

WEISGARD, LEONARD (1916- ), is an .\merican 
artist and illustrator of books for children. He won the 
Caldecott medal in 1947 for his illustrations in the book 
The Little Island by Golden MacDonald. These illustra- 
tions are examples of his frequendy lavish use of color. 

Weisgard was bom in New Haven, Conn., and 
studied art at Pratt Institute, in Brooklyn, .\mong the 
books he illusuated are several by Mai'garet Wise 
Brown, including The Golden Egg Book (1947) and the 
'WoisY Books." Weisgard also wrote and illustrated 
Silly ' Willy NiUy (1953), Treasures to See (1956), Mr. 
Peaceable Paints ( 1 957), and The Athenians in the Classical 

Period ( 1 963) . Ruth Hill Viguers 

WEISMANN, VICE malm, AUGUST (1834-1914), a 
German biologist, is known chiefly for his theories of 
heredity' and evolution. He stressed the independence 
from die rest of the body of the^erm plasm, his name for 
the factors of inheritance in the sex cells. He denied 
that acquired characterisdcs can be inherited. He lo- 
cated the germ plasm in the chromosomes, a prediction 
that was proved correct early in the 1900's. Weismann 
upheld the theor&gt;' of natural selection and was one of 
the first German scientists to support Charles Darwin. 

In ^Veismann's later years, he devoted himself chiefly 
to theoretical smdies, and wrote extensively on heredity 
and evolution. His major \vork, The Germ Plasm, ap- 
peared in 1892. Weismann was bom in Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany. mordecai l. gabriei. 

WEISMULLER, "JOHNNY," JOHN. See Swimming 
(Famous Swunmers). 



155 




Chaim Weizmann 



WEIZMANN, CHAIM 

WEIZMANN, VlTSnw/m, CHAIM (1874-1952), was 
a chemist and Zionist leader. He became the first presi- 
dent of Israel in 1949. During World War I, he dis- 
covered an improved method of making acetone, used 
in the manufacture of explosives. This aid to Brit- 
ain's war effort helped induce the British cabinet to 
issue the Balfour Declara- 
tion in 1917, which en- 
couraged setting up a Jewish 
state in Palestine. 

Weizmann was born at 
Motele, near Pinsk in Rus- 
sia. He conducted research 
in Geneva, Switzerland, 
and taught chemistiy in 
Manchester, England. P'rom 
his early days, he was in- 
terested in the Zionist work 
of Theodor Herzl. Weiz- 
mann headed the Jewish 
delegation at the Paris 
Peace Conference in 1919, 
and succeeded in having the mandate for Palestine 
assigned to Great Britain. He served as president of the 
World Zionist Organization from 19'20 to 1929 and 
again from 1935 to 1946. He opposed all attempts to 
prevent Jewish immigration to Israel. Svdney n. Fisher 
WELDING is the process of joining two or more similar 
pieces of metal into one continuous body. The two 
metallic surfaces must be brought into such intimate 
contact that the metal atoms at one surface intermingle 
with those at the other surface. This requires perfectly 
clean surfaces, with no foreign matter to interfere. Dur- 
ing the welding, a chemical compound called nflux is 
used. The flu.x melts and dissolves any scale or oxide 
that may form when the metal is heated. Borax and 
salt are examples of welding fluxes, but patented mix- 
tures are usually employed. The weld is then made 
either by application of pressure (usually to metal made 
plastic by heating), or by surface fusion. 

Kinds of Welding 

Pressure Welding began hundreds of years ago, when 
blacksmiths heated the edges of metal until they be- 

Electric Welding of the Metallic-Arc Type. The electrode 
holder carries a positive electric charge. The charge flows 
through the electrode and forms on arc between the end of 
the electrode and the negatively charged metal being welded. 
The intense heat of the arc melts the end of the electrode, and 
causes the metal to flow into the seam and form a strong weld. 



Electrode holder 




came soft, then hammered them together. This joined 
the metal, but did not result in complete fusion. Today 
pressure welding still depends on the basic principle of 
heat, plus pressure, to make the weld. But instead of 
heating the metal edges with fire, they are now usually 
heated by the resistance which they offer to the passage 
of an electric current through them. This is electric re- 
sistance welding. Instead of being hammered together, the 
sheets are pressed together in great hydraulic presses. 

Fusion Welding recjuires far greater temperatures than 
does pressure welding. Usually molten metal is added 
at the joint by a filler ro(/ which the welder holds. At the 
same time, the metal edges which form the joint must 
be heated well above their melting point. There are 
three main methods of surface fusion: electric arc, oxy- 
acetylene, and thermite welding. 

Electric Arc welding is considered the best of all sur- 
face fusion methods for general purposes, because it 
creates the highest temperatures. The temperature in 
electric arc welding may be more than 7500° F. The a'C 
is formed by an electric current which travels down 
through the welder's tool, then jumps across the inter- 
vening space to the metal joint, or it may travel between 
the joint and the metal filler rod. When the arc is 
formed between the joint and a graphite or carbon rod, 
it is called carbon-arc welding. When the arc is formed 
between the metal filler rod and the joint, it is termed 
metallic-arc welding. Metallic-arc welding is the com- 
moner method. The flux is applied in the form of a 
coating on the filler rod. Shielded arc welding is a method 
using a flux which turns to gas under heat. The gas 
forms a protective envelope around the joint during 
the welding process. 

Oxyacetylene Welding. The use of a blowpipe in metal- 
working and other arts is an ancient process. But it was 
not until men discovered how to use gases that burn at 
very high temperatures that blowpipes were developed 
for welding metals. 

.Scientists knew as early as 1895 that a mixture of cer- 
tain proportions of o.xygen with acetylene would burn 
at a very high temperature. But a suitable blowtorch 
for using such a hot flame was not developed until 1903. 
Since then the oxyacetylene method of welding has 
come into wide use. The welding torch is supplied from a 
tank with acetylene gas. It is also connected with a tank 
of oxygen by a nozzle which allows just the right amount 
of oxygen to mix with the acetylene to obtain the heat 
desired. The welder holds the welding torch in one 
hand, and applies the hot flame (usually reaching a 
temperature of about 6000° F.) to the metal joint. In 
the other hand, he holds a slender rod of metal which 
he also places in the flame of the torch. As the inetal 
filler rod melts, he stirs the molten metal thoroughly in 
between the edges of the melting metals which are to 
be welded. Thus he forms a strong, even weld. 

The oxyacetylene method is also used to cut metals. 
The flame is used first to heat the metal very hot over 
a small spot, and then a jet of oxygen is directed onto 
the hot metal. This generates even more heat, which 
fuses the metal and causes it to flow away, leaving a 
sharp, clean cut. See Acetylene. 

Thermite Welding was one of the first fusion welding 
methods to be perfected. .Since its discovery in Germany 
in 1897, it has come into wide use, especially in railway 
and ship repair shops. This process is based on the chem- 



156 



ical reaction which occurs between aluminum and iron 
oxide under heat. A mixture of the t^\■o is heated at one 
spot, setting up a chemical reaction which generates 
great heat throughout the entire mixture. The alumi- 
num takes the oxygen from the iron, and leaves the 
molten iron free, at a temperature of about 5.000° F. 
The molten iron is poured into a mold which encloses 
the parts to be welded. The edges of the joint are already 
heated to a plastic state, and they combine with the 
molten iron to form a solid \\eld. William g. n. Heer 

See also Brazlvg; Thermite. 

WELf . .See Gt-ELPHS .and Ghibellines. 

WELFARE ADMINISTRATION, a U.S. govemment 
agencv. helps needy families and individuals. The agen- 
cy provides grants-in-aid to states for old-age assistance; 
aid to the blind: aid to the permanently and totally 
disabled; aid to families with dependent children; and 
medical assistance for the aged. Other grants to states 
help support child welfare, crippled children, and ma- 
ternal and child health programs. The agency also 
helps Cuban refugees, supports demonstration programs 
for controlling juvenile delinquency, and helps states 
develop programs for elderly persons. 

The Welfare Administration was set up in 1963 in 
the Department of Health. Educadon, and Welfare. It 
includes the Children's Bureau, Bureau of Family .Serv- 
ices, Cuban Refugee Program, and International Of- 
fice, all formerly administered by the Social Security 
Administration. The Welfare Administration also has 
an Office of Aging and an Office of Juvenile De- 
linquency and Youth Development. 

Critically reviewed by Welf.\RE AdminISTR.MION 

See also Social Security' (Public Assistance). 

WELFARE ISLAND is a stiip of land about If miles 
long in the East River, between Manhattan Island and 
the borough of Queens, New York City (see New York 
Crr\' [map]). The cir^' uses the island as a site for hos- 
pitals, health institutions, and welfare stations. 

WELFARE ORGANIZATIONS. See CARE; Family 
Sermce Assocl^tion of America; Jewish Welfare 
Board, National; National Catholic Welfare 
Conference; Public Welfare Assoclation, A\rERi- 
can; Ser\'ice Club. 

WELFARE STATE is a term sometimes applied to a 
countr\- in which the govemment assumes major re- 
sponsibility for the social welfare of its people. 

WELFARE WORK. See Soclal Work. 

WELL is a hole in the earth from which a fluid is 
withdrawn. Water wells are the most common type, 
followed by those for oil and natural gas. Mining com- 
panies also use wells to remove salt and sulfur from deep 
in the ground. They pump down steam or hot water 
to remove these materials. 

The Depth of a Water Well depends on the level of the water 
table. A well must be deep enough to reach water in dry weather. 




Water Table m Damp VV, 



eoHie 



WELL 

Water Wells. The underground water that flows into 
wells is called ground water (see Ground Water). This 
water comes from rain that soaks into the ground and 
slowly moves do\\'n to the ground water reservoir, an area 
of soil and rock saturated with water. The top of this 
zone is the water table, the level at which water stands 
in a well that is not being pumped. 

In damp places, the water table may lie just below 
the surface. It is easily reached by digging. A dug well 
is usuallv lined with bricks, stone, or porous concrete, 
to keep the sides from caving in. In drier places, the 
water table may be hundreds of feet down. It may then 
be necessary- to drill the well and sink pipes. Power- 
driven pumps usually are used to draw the water out 
of deep wells. 

In some areas, underground water moving down 
from the slopes of hills and mountains becomes trapped 
tmder watertight layers of clay or shale. Wells drilled 
through these layers in valleys and plains mn into 
water under pressure. These wells are called art:sian 
wells, if the pressure is strong enough to make water 
flow from them without pumping. See .\rtesian Well. 

Many persons still depend on wells for their water 
supply, especially in rural areas. Some cities also get 
their water from wells. Underground \vater is usually 
pure because the soil makes a good filter. Sometimes 
undergroimd water contains minerals. A weU that taps 
this kind of water is called a mineral well. 

Water wells should be located so that they do not 
collect poisons or disease germs. A well should be at 

A Properly Built Well has brick sides that reach to the water 
table. Below this, a lining of loose stones and gravel allows water 
to seep in. A tight cover keeps out contaminated surface water. 



^^Tayejn_pry_w7athe7 




WELLAND SHIP CANAL 

least 100 feet from a privy or cesspool, and should never 
be located so that sewage drains toward it. Water from 
a well sunk through limestone may also be dangerous 
because water runs through crevices and caves in lime- 
stone without being filtered. It is also important that 
surface water does not drain into a well. 

Oil and Natural-Gas Wells. Oil and natural gas are 
lighter than water. Because of this, they would normally 
float upward and escape from the ground. But oil and 
gas become trapped beneath thick beds of rock in 
areas called pools. Wells penetrate deep into the earth 
to reach these pools and bring the oil and gas to the 
surface. Wildcat wells are drilled in search of new 
pools. A production well is drilled into a proven field to 
extract oil or gas. 

Drilling oil and gas wells is a highly developed 
Bcience. The men who drill deep wells must have many 
years of training and experience. The cost of a deep 
oil well may be several hundred thousand dollars. .See 
Gas (Natural Gas; color picture); Petroleum (Drilling 
an Oil Well), 

Locating Wells also requires a high degree of training. 
Geologists and engineers must be able to find where 
large amounts of oil or water lie, and determine at what 
rate they can take these materials out of the ground, 
and how much they can remove without damaging the 
natural resources. 

Today, scientists and engineers use modern equip- 
ment such as seismographs to Ibcate underground de- 
posits (see Seismogr.aph). But at one time, and some- 
times even today, people have Used a kind of magic in 
an attempt to locate water. For example, some people 
used a forked branch, usually from a peach tree, to 
locate water. If such a branch, called a divining rod, is 
gripped firmly on the two forks and bent outward, the 
main stem will move up or down, unless the holder 
exerts effort to prevent this. A slight relaxation permits 
the main stem to point down. Some persons believe 
that when this happens, the stem is pointing to a water 
source. Persons using this device are sometimes success- 
ful, but only because they have a common-sense idea 
of where water is usually found. John c. Geyer 

See also W.\ter Si'pplv. 

WELLAND SHIP CANAL is one of Canada's great- 
est engineering projects. It forms a navigable waterway 
27 miles long between Lake Erie and Lake Ontario. 
The only natural connection between these two lakes is 
the Niagara River, whose great falls and rapids make it 
useless as a commercial waterway. 

The Welland Canal extends from Port Colborne to 
Port Weller, a few miles east of Port Dalhousie. A ship 
up to 700 feet long can sail on the canal. Lake Erie is 
326 feet higher than Lake Ontario, so ships must be 
raised and lowered by locks. This is done by a series 
of eight locks. 

The project to connect Lake Erie and Lake Ontario 
was first attempted in 1824. The original canal was 
built by a private company, and cost about 87,700,000. 
A small ditch was dug from Port Dalhousie on Lake 
Ontario to Port Robinson on Chippawa Creek. Ships 
sailed down the creek to the Niagara River, and then 
went up Lake Erie. In a short time, the shipping indus- 
try was looking for a larger waterway to handle ships of 



LAKE ONTARIO 



St Colhonne^ 

Thorold I 



CAN aJD a 



rJiagaro 




Niaqaro P&gt;v 


LockpOFt 


■Jioqarri Foil 


UNITED 


^ To 


nawondo 


^-\ 


STATES 

1 fluffolo 



The Old and New Welland Canals connect Lake Erie with 
Lake Ontario. (1 ) New canal; (2) old canal; (3) branch. 

much greater length than could be sailed on the first 
canal. The project was taken over by the government 
of L'pper Canada, which is now Ontario. It was greatly 
enlarged in 1871, at a cost of $21,749,000. 

In 1912, the Canadian government began added im- 
provements which resulted in the Welland Canal of to- 
day. The canal opened on Aug. 6, 1932. The project 
cost $130,000,000. Only the St. Lawrence Seaway cost 
more to build. A reforestation project has been devel- 
oped along the canal route to protect vessels from 
strong crosswinds. Loading docks service cities and fac- 
tories along this route. The Welland Ship Canal carries 
about 31,000.000 tons of freight a year. It can be used 
by the largest bulk caiTiers on the Great Lakes. 

Ships can sail through the new canal in 8 hours or 
less, compared to the 16 hours required over the old 
waterway. The Welland Canal forms an important 
part of the .Saint Lawrence .Seaway. D. M. L. Farr 

See also Can.\d.\, History of (color picture); Saint 
Lawrence Seaw.w. 

WELLER, THOMAS HUCKLER (1915- ), a research 
biologist, shared the 1954 Nobel prize in physiology 
and medicine with John F. Enders and Frederick C. 
Rabbins (see Enders, John F.; Robbins, F. C). 

The men grew poliomyelitis viruses on tissues of 
human embiyos outside the body (see Poliomyelitis). 
Weller also isolated and grew chicken pox, mumps, and 
shingles vimses. He was born in Ann Arbor, Mich. He 
became head of Harvard L'niversity's public health 
department in 1954. he.nry h. fertio 

WELLES, weiz. GIDEON (1802-1878), was Secretaiy of 
the Navy in the Cabinet of President .Abraham Lincoln. 
Originally a Democrat, he 
joined the Republican 
party when it was organ- 
ized. Lincoln appointed 
him .Secretary' of the Navy 
at the beginning of the 
Civil War. Under his 
management, the L'nion 
Navy set up a blockade 
along the Confederate 
coast, and formed a fleet of 
gunboats and ironclad 
vessels on the Mississippi 
River. Welles remained in 
the Cabinet of President 
.\ndrew Johnson, and vig- 



Gideon Welles 

Brown Bri 



'"" T^ 







Orson Welles 



orously upheld the President's Reconstruction policy. 

Welles was born at Glastonbury, Conn., and studied 
at Norwich University. From 1826 to 1836, he edited 
the Hartford {Conn.) Times. He was Chief of the Bureau 
of Provisions and Clothing of the United States Navy 
Department from 1845 to 1849. vv. b. Hesseltine 

WELLES, ORSON (1915- ), actor, director, and pro- 
ducer, won recognition on the stage, in radio, and in 
nrotion pictures. He became 
best known for his sensa- 
tional experiments in all 
three fields. In 1938, his 
Mercury Theatre group 
presented a radio show that 
pretended to report an in- 
vasion from Mars. Many 
people believed that an 
actual invasion had been 
made, and the program 
caused widespread terror. 
Welles made his motion 
picture debut in Citizen 
Kane in 1941. Later films 
included The AJagnificcnt 

Ambersons, The Third Man, and Macbeth. He also di- 
rected plays, including Julius Caesar and Heartbreak 
House. He was born in Kenosha. Wis. Bosley Crowther 

WELLES, SUMNER (1892-1961), an American diplo- 
mat, served in the Department of .State most of his life. 
In 1933, as ambassador to Cuba, he helped end a civil 
war there. He served as Under Secretaiy of State from 
1937 to 1943. President Franklin D. Roosevelt sent him 
to report on the European crisis in 1940. Welles was 
born in New York City. Harvev Wish 

WELLESLEY COLLEGE is a privately controlled liberal 
arts school for women at Wellesley. Mass. It grants the 
degrees of B.A. and M.A. Wellesley is noted for its art 
and library collections and its laboratories for the 
sciences. W'ellesley blue is the school color, and a popu- 
lar college song is "To Alma Mater." Heniy Fowle 
Durant founded Wellesley College in 1870. The school 
first opened in 1875. For enrollment, see Universities 

AND Colleges (table). Jean Glasscock 

WELLINGTON (pop. 123,969; met. area 249,532; 
alt. 415 ft.) is the capital, second largest seaport, and 
third largest city of New Zealand. It stands on hills 
overlooking the harbor of Port Nicholson on the south- 
ern coast of North Island. See New Zealand (color 
map). Ocean-going ships can dock in the harbor. 

Wellington has fine government buildings, two cathe- 
drals, a library, art galleiy, and museum. The offices 
of the University of New Zealand and one of its affili- 
ates, the Victoria University, are in Wellington. Parks 
and forest preserves cover more than one tenth of the 
city. Flower gardens bloom throughout the year in the 
public botanical gardens and in gardens planted by 
homeowners. The city contains many factories, in- 
cluding a large automobile plant. 

British settlers founded Wellington in 1840. The 
capital was moved from Auckland in 1865 because of 
Wellington's central location. j. B. Condliffe 

WELLINGTON, DUKE OF (1769-1852), Arthur 
Wellesley, was a British soldier and statesman who 
was known as Tlje Iron Duke. He became famous as 
the general who overcame the armies of Napoleon in 



WELLINGTON, DUKE OF 

Spain and Portugal, and defeated Napoleon at the 
Battle of Waterloo. Later, he became a leader of the 
Tory party and served as prime minister. 

Young Soldier. Wellington was born in Dublin, Ire- 
land, the fourth son of Garrett Wellesley, Earl of Morn- 
ington. The young man was educated at Eton College 
and at a military college in France. At 18, he entered 
the army as an ensign. 

Wellington rose rapidly and by 1 796 had reached the 
rank of colonel. He first saw combat in 1 794 in the cam- 
paign in Flanders, and made a reputation as a brave 
soldier. In 1 796, his regiment was sent to India, where 
his brother was governor-general. Wellington became a 
major general before he \vas 35, and in 1803 he was 
given command of the British forces in the Mahratta 
War. He soon defeated the Mahratta chiefs and firmly 
established British power in India. 

Peninsular War. In 1805, Wellington returned to Eng- 
land, and was elected the next year to Parliament. Two 
years later he was appointed C^hief Secretary of Ireland. 
While there, he worked for lower rents and laid the 
foundation of the Irish police. 

In 1808, Spain revolted against Napoleon, and the 
British sent troops there to help the .Spanish. Wellington 
was promoted to lieutenant general and took command 
of one of the British divisions fighting in the peninsula 
of Spain and Portugal. Three weeks after he landed in 
Portugal, he defeated the French in the Battle of 
Vimeiro and forced them to leave Portugal. 

Victory in Spain. In 1809, Wellington became com- 
mander of all British forces in the Peninsular War. He 
received little help from the inefficient armies and gov- 
ernments of Spain and Portugal. But his small army 
won victory after victory. Slowly, he drove the French 
forces from the peninsula. 

In April, 1814, Wellington, newly created a viscount, 
won the Battle of Toulouse, and the British troops were 
able to enter France. Napoleon quit his throne, and the 
war ended. Wellington returned to England in triumph, 
and was given the title of Duke of Wellington. 

Victory at Waterloo. In July, 1814, Wellington was 
appointed ambassador to France. The following year, 
he represented Great Britain at the Congress of Vienna, 
although the Congress had completed most of its work 
before he arrived (see Vienna, Congress of). He was at 
\'ienna when the Congress heard of Napoleon's escape 
from Elba and return to France. Wellington signed 
the declaration that named 
Napoleon "the enemy and 
disturber of the peace of the 
world," and took command 
of the allied forces in The 
Netherlands. At the Battle 
of Waterloo, Wellinglon 
fought Napoleon himself 
for the first time. In this 
batde, Wellington rode at 
the head of his troops and, 
with Prince Gebhard Blii- 
cher's Prussian army, com- 
pletely crushed Napoleon's 
power (see Blucher. Geb- 
hard L. von). After that, 



Duke off Wellington 

E\i ing Galloway 




WELLMAN, WALTER 

Wellington commanded the army that occupied France 
for a short time. See Waterloo, Battle of. 

Political Career. In 1818 Wellington returned to Eng- 
land and served in various government and diplomatic 
positions. He became commander in chief of the army 
in 1827, but resigned the next year to become prime 
minister. 

Wellington belonged to the Tory party, but he 
angered many in his party by pushing through a Catho- 
lic emancipation act that gave the vote to Roman 
Catholics and removed political liabilities from them. 
The British people demanded parliamentary reform, 
and Wellington's opposition to a reform bill made his 
government unpopular. In 1830 he was forced to resign. 
The Tory party returned to power in 1834, but Wel- 
lington refused to become prime minister again. Seven 
years later, he became a member of Sir Robert Peel's 
cabinet and again served as commander in chief of the 
army. He retired in 1846. Although his opposition to 
reform made him unpopular at times, Wellington was 
respected as a national hero and was buried in Saint 

Paul's Cathedral. Charles F. Mullett 

WELLMAN, WALTER. See Airship (United States 
Airships). 

WELLS, HEBER M. See Utah (History). 
WELLS, HENRY. See Wells, Fargo &amp; Company. 
WELLS, "H.G.," HERBERT GEORGE (1866-1946), 
was a British author of many books. He wrote novels, 
histories, sociological and political essays, popular 
science, and science fiction. He wrote hastily, and con- 
sidered himself a journalist rather than a literary artist. 
He had a zeal for reforming institutions and social views, 
and he often used fiction to convey his social opinions. 
In The Outline of History (1920) Wells tried to sum- 
marize world history. It was popular for a time, though 
many critics consider it superficial. Tono-Bungay (1909) 
is a satiric sketch of British society. The New Machiavelli 
(191 1) is a savage indictment of England at the begin- 
ning of the 1900's. Wells did not hesitate to say what he 
believed in his crusade to cast out evil in politics, busi- 
ness, and social customs. 

Already a socialist. Wells, in 1903, joined the Fabian 
Society, of which George Bernard Shaw was a member 
(see Fabian Society). But he became impatient with it, 
and drifted away to work 
as an individual for social 
reform. During World War 
I, he wrote that out of the 
catastrophe would come a 
world organization. He be- 
came more skeptical of 
social progress in his very 
last works. With the rise of 
interest in science fiction, 
such books as The Invisible 
Man (1897) and The War 
of the Worlds (1898) have 
remained popular. These 
H. G. Wells books also have a moral 

purpose, implying a criti- 
cism of life. Wells was born at Bromley, Kent, on Sept. 

21, 1866. Walter Wright 

WELLS, HORACE. See Dentistry (History). . 

i6o 




WELLS COLLEGE. See Universities and Colleges 
(table). 

WELLS, FARGO &amp; COMPANY was an early Amer- 
ican express organization. Henry Wells and William G. 
Faigo founded the company in 1852. They planned an 
express service from San Francisco to New York City, 
with the American Express Company sei-ving as eastern 
representative. In 1866, Benjamin HoUaday sold his 
overland mail and stagecoach business to Wells, Fargo 
&amp; Company, which soon became the most powerful 
firm in the Far West. 

Wells, Fargo &amp; Company earned passengers, freight, 
and mail. It specialized in shipping gold and silver from 
western mines. It also developed a banking business on 
the Pacific Coast. The fiiTn lost heavily after the com- 
pletion of the Central-Union Pacific in 1869. Wells, 
Fargo &amp; Company merged with the six other major ex- 
press companies in 1918 to form the American Railway 

Express Company. w. Turrentine Jackson 

See also Fargo, William George. 

WELSBACH, VELS bahk, BARON VON (1858-1929), 
Carl Auer, was an Austrian chemist and pioneer in 
artificial lighting. He is noted chiefly as the inventor of 
the Welsbach mantle, a gaslight that was used through- 
out the world. He also invented the osmium filament 
for electric lamps and was the first to isolate the elements 
neodymium and praseodymium. 

Welsbach was born in Vienna, and studied chemistry 
at Heidelberg University. Later, he attended the Uni- 
versity of Vienna. k. L. Kaufman 

See also Gas (Improvement of Gas Flame); Neo- 
dymium; Praseodymium. 
WELSH. See Wales (The People). 




Small Welsh Corgis Are Popular Cattle Dogs in Wales. 

WELSH CORGI, KAWRgih, is a small dog that comes 
from Wales. It is used there to herd cattle and pigs. 
There are two varieties of the corgi, the Pembroke and 
the Cardigan. Both breeds have short, strong legs and 
deep, strong bodies. They may be almost any color 
except solid white. The dogs have short, pointed heads 
like the heads of foxes. Both breeds stand about 12 
inches tall. henrv p. davis 

See also Doo (color picture, Working Dogs). 



WELSH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE. See Wales 
(Wav of Lil'c; The Arts). 

WELSH SPRINGER SPANIEL looks like its relative, 
the English springer. It is a little smaller, and its coat is 
always red and white. As a sporting dog, the Welsh 
springer has a keen sense of smell, and will work well 
even in bad weather and rough brush. It can retrieve 
game on land or in the water. But unless this dog is 
trained well while it is young, it may be headstrong and 
independent. William F. Brown 

The Welsh Springer Spaniel Hunts Many Kinds of Game. 

Evel&gt;ii Shafer 




WELSH TERRIER is one ul the oldest English breeds of 
dogs. It has been known in Wales for several hundred 
years. It is closely related to die original black and tan 
terrier of England. The Welsh looks like a small-sized 
Airedale, with its wiry coat of deep red and jet black 
markings. It has a long head and powerful jaws. This 
terrier weighs about 20 pounds. Josephine z. Rine 

See also Dog (color picture, Terriers). 

WELTERWEIGHT. .See Boxing (The Classes). 

WELTY, EUDORA (1909- ), is one of a group of 
United States writers who have taken the South for the 
settings of their stories. Most of her works, which include 
short stories, a novel, and a book-length fantasy, are set 
in Mississippi. Like William Faulkner, she traces fic- 
tional family sagas. Her subjects are usually somber and 
her characters unhappy, but she describes them with 
considerable detachment. 

Miss Welty was born in Jacksoit, Miss. .She attended 
Mississippi State College, and was graduated from the 
University of Wisconsin. Katherine Anne Porter recog- 
nized her talent as a writer and wrote a complimentary 
preface for Miss Welt\'"s first book, .1 Curtain of Green 
(1941). Her other books include Delta Wedding (1946), 
The Golden Apples (1949), The Ponder Heart (1954), and 
The Bride of the Innisf alien (1955). Richard Ellmann 

WELWITSCHIA, ivel JiTCH ih uh, is a peculiar plant 
which grows in the sandy deserts of the southwestern 
coasts of Africa. It was named for Friedrich Welwitsch, 
an Austrian botanist of the 1800's. Its short, woody 
trunk rises from a large taproot and spreads like a table 
top to a width of 5 or 6 feet. The plant resembles a 
giant, flattened mushroom. It is also called Tumboa. 




Chicago Natural History Museum 

The Welwitschia Plant of Southwestern Africa has two 

long leaves, each of which is usually split by the wind. 

A single pair of green leaves spills over the top. 
They are 2 or 3 feet wide and often twice as long. The 
leaves are woody, and grow from the base. They live as 
long as the plant does. Hot winds blow the leaves about 
and split them into long, slender, ribbonlike shreds 
which trail on the dry ground. 

Every year, stiff, jointed, stemlike growths from 6 to 
12 inches long develop at the point where the leaves 
join the trunk. These growths bear small, erect flower 
spikes called cone clusters. The male cones are small, 
but the bright scarlet female cones are about as large 
as a fir cone. They are pollinated by insects. The 
plants live 100 years or more, with only t^vo leaves 
to manufacture food during the entire time. 

Scientific Classification. Welwitschia belongs to the 
family Giietaceae. It is genus Welwitschia, species 11-'. mirab- 
ilis. Edmund C. J.\eger 

WEN is a growth, or cyst, in the skin. It forms when 
the secretion of a sebaceous gland collects inside the 
gland. It is also known as a sebaceous cyst. Round or 
oval lumps, from the size of a pea to a walnut, may 
slowly appear, usually on the scalp, face, or shoulder. 
They might appear on any part of the body but the sole 
of the foot and the palm. 

Wens are soft and painless. They hold a yellowish- 
white matter, which may have a rancid odor. Any lump 
or growth in die skin should be seen by a doctor as soon 

as possible. Hvman S. Rubinstein 

See also Cyst. 

WENCESLAUS, SAINT. See Prague (History). 

WENCHOU, ]\T\\ JOH, or Yungkia, TOO.KG jih 
.4// (pop. 250,000; alt. 430 ft.), is a busy seaport and the 
most important city in the Chekiang Province of China. 
The town stands on the Wu River, about 40 miles from 
the East China Sea and 240 miles southwest of Shang- 
hai. For location, see China (color map). 

The city is an important marketing center for farm 
products and raw materials from the interior, and a 
major shipping port for timber and bamboo. Manu- 
factures include leather goods, straw mats, and um- 
brellas. The city was opened to foreign trade in 1876 
and was a center of the tea trade. Theodore h. e. Chen 

i6i 



WENHAM, FRANCIS H. 

WENHAM, FRANCIS H. See Helicopter (Early Ex- 
periments). 

WENTWORTH, BENNING (1696-1770), served as 
royal governor of New Hampshire from 1741 to 1767. 
He is chiefl)- remembered for making land grants in 
what is now \'ermont, an area then claimed both bv 
New York and New Hampshire. In each town grant, he 
took 500 acres for himself Wentworth grew rich on fees 
and land. Bennington, \"t., is named after him. He 
was born in Portsmouth, N.H., and was graduated from 
Harvard. He helped inake New Hampshire independ- 
ent of Massachusetts. Bradford Sotth 

WENTWORTH, THOMAS. .See .Strafford, Earl of. 

WENTWORTH, WILLIAM. See .^usTRALLA (Explora- 
tion Period). 

WEREWOLF, WEER wolf, is a word of Anglo-Saxon 
origin which means man-ivolf. A story in Greek mvthol- 
og)' relates that Lycaon, king of Arcadia, served human 
flesh to Zeus when the god was his guest. Zeus punished 
him by turning him into a wolf 

An Irish legend says that Saint Patrick turned King 
N'ereticus into a wolf People of the Middle .Ages be- 
lieved that certain persons who were men during the 
da&gt;- changed into wolves at night. These werewolves 
ate huinan flesh, and only a silver bullet could kill 
them. This idea still exists in some middle European 
countries. Shorth- before Germany was defeated in 
World W'ar II, an unsuccessful attempt was made to 
start a "werewolf movement" of resistance against the 
Allies. 

The technical name for werewolf is lycanthrope, from 
the name of Lycaon. Lycanthropy is a certain form of 
mental illness in which a person imagines himself to be 

a wolf James F. Crosm 

WERFEL, VAIR fa/. FRANZ (1890-1945), was an 
Austrian novelist, plawright, and poet. His novel, The 
Song of Bernadette (1941), became a successful motion 
picture. His first prose work, Xot the Murderer (1920), 
introduced the expressionistic movement in the German 
novel. Werfel also wrote the play Jaeobowsky and the 
Colonel (1944): and the novels The Pure in Heart (1929), 
and The Forty Days of Musa Dagh (1933). He was born 
in Prague. His earliest works were poems criticizing 
the militaristic philosophy of the early 1900's. He came 
to the United States to live in 1940. c. F. Merkel 

WERNER, ALFRED (1866-1919), was a Swiss chemist. 
He won the 1913 Nobel prize for chemistn,-. His most 
famous work is concerned with a t&gt;pe of valence known 
as "coordinate. " This theoiy helped to explain the 
unusual properties of certain compounds. Werner also 
became noted as an originator of structure theor)', and 
conducted some famous research on isomerisin of or- 
ganic substances. His ideas underlie the development 
of present-day inorganic chemistiy. He was born in 

Mulhouse, France. K. L. Kaufman 

WESCOTT, GLENWAY (1901- ), is an American 
novelist. His novel The Grandmothers won the Harper 
prize in 1927. His Apartment in Athens, which is an 
account of life in Greece during the German occupa- 
tion, was a best seller in 1945. Other works include The 
Apple of the Eye(\9'24). Good-bye, Wisconsin (1928), and 
The Pi/grim Hawk (1940). Wescott was born at Kewas- 
kum, Wis., and studied at the University of Chicago. 

162 



He lived in France for many years, but returned to the 

United States in 1939. George J. Becker 

WESER RIVER, VAT zer, is an important German 
watenvay. Its inain headwater, the Werra, rises on the 
southwestern slopes of the Thuringian Forest in central 
Germany. The Weser winds for 500 miles through pic- 
turesque country. It flows through a wide mouth into 
the North Sea near Bremerhaven. For location, see 
GERMAm- (color map). In 1894, its channel was deep- 
ened from the mouth to Bremen, 46 miles from the 
North Sea. Large ocean-going vessels could then sail to 
Bremen. Above Bremen, locks and dams aid naviga- 
tion. Hameln, the "Hamelin Town" of Robert Brown- 
ing's ''Pied Piper," lies on the Weser. Frank o. Ahnert 
WESLEY is the family name of three prominent British 
clergN'men, a father and two sons. 

Samuel Wesley (1662-1735) was a minister of the 
Church of England. In 1695, he was appointed rector 
of Epworth parish, near Lincoln. A devout and serious 
pastor, he suffered froin the opposition of his parish- 
ioners and from indebtedness. He wrote several books, 
including History of the Xew Testament Att:mpted in 
Verse (1701) and the iriassive Dissertation on Job (1736). 
Wesley was bom in Dorset, the son of a dissenter from 
die Church of England. He was educated as a dissent- 
er, but when a young man, he wrs converted to the 
Church of England. 

John Wesley (1703-1791), the older son of Samuel 
Wesley, was a leader of the Evangelical Revival and 
founder of the Methodist Church in Great Britain and 
AiTierica. He was born at Epworth. His vigorous inother 
raised him strictly but effectively. Almost as soon as the 
children could w-alk, they were taught the alphabet, 
and began immediately to read the Bible. When John 
was six, the recton- burned to the ground, and the little 
boy was the last person rescued. After that time, he 
thought of himself as "a brand plucked from the burn- 
ing" by God. 

Education. Wesley attended C;harterhouse School in 
London, and O-xford University. For two )-ears he 
helped his father as curate at Epworth. During this 
period, John's brother Clharies started the Holy Club, 
a small group of students who met at Oxford for Bible 
study and prayer. When John returned to O.xford, he 

John Wesley, Founder of Methodism, rode through Eng- 
land in the 1 700's to preach his doctrines and gain converts, 

J.-ilih H..i,'j,'s ULiilo. M'Mit-rn Enterprises 




joined heartily in the group's activities, and soon be- 
came the leader. This attempt to lead a Christian life 
through method (discipline) was an important step in 
his spiritual growth. It also led more worldly students 
to call the group "Methodists." 

Georgia and Conversion. Between 1735 and 1738, 
Wesley went as a chaplain on a mission to the colony 
of Georgia. He hoped to convert the Indians and to 
save his own soul. Although he believed that he failed 
in both purposes, he learned much about people and 
faith. He was impressed by the calm courage of Mora- 
vian missionaries aboard his ship during a great stomi at 
sea. 

After long searching, Wesley was given "saving faith" 
on May 24, 1 738, during a Moravian meeting in Alders- 
gate Street, London. His "heart was strangely warmed" 
as he listened to a reading of Martin Lutlier's preface 
to the Episde to Romans, a book of the New Testament. 
A short time later, he preached a semion on salvation by 
faith, a theme he emphasized through 50 years of 
preaching. 

Organization of Methodist Societies. Wesley settled 
down to a long career of preaching in England, Ireland, 
and Scodand. Between 1739 and 1744, he showed his 
amazing skill at organization by forming the societies 
that eventually became the Methodist Church. When 
authorities who disapproved of his new methods and 
difTerent preaching closed the pulpits of Anglican 
churches to him, he followed the lead of George White- 
field and preached in the open fields and on street 
corners (see Whitefield, George). 

Wesley trained a group of lay preachers who traveled 
endlessly. In 1 742, he applied the plan of class meeUngs. 
Under this plan, classes of 12 met weekly for prayer, 
Bible study, religious discussion, and mutual help in 
Christian living. In 1744, 
Wesley met with a few oth- 
er Methodist ministers in 
the first organized confer- 
ence. 

Rise of the Methodist 
Church. As long as he lived, 
Wesley remained loyal to 
the Church of England, of 
which he was an ordained 
minister. At the time of the 
American Revolutionary 
War, however, he formally 
recognized his differences 
witli the Anglican Church 
by ordaining two preachers 
and appointing Thomas Coke and Francis Asbury 
joint superintendents of work in America. This was the 
beginning of a separate Methodist Episcopal Church. 
Wesley continued to travel, mosdy on horseback, 
visiting his societies and preaching, sometimes four or 
five times a day. He probably traveled more than 
250,000 miles during his lifetime. When he died, the 
church had about 175,000 members and 630 lay 
preachers. He wrote many works, some of which, 
especially his Journal{\12&gt;b-\19Q), have become classics. 
Charles Wesley (1 707-1 788), a younger son of Samuel 
Wesley, was the famous hymn writer of Methodism. 
He perhaps \vrote more than 6,000 hymns. These 
hymns made him famous among evangelical Protes- 




Charles Wesley 



WEST, BENJAMIN 

tants, who still sing them. His more familiar hymns 
include "O for a Thousand Tongues," "Jesus, Lover of 
My Soul," and "Love Divine, All Loves Excelling." 

Wesley was born at Epworth, and studied at West- 
minster School in London and at O.xford University. 
At Oxford, he led in the formation of the Holy Club. 
He was ordained in 1735 and sailed with his brother 
John to Georgia. 

On May 21, 1738, after a reading of Martin Luther's 
commentar)- on the Epistle to the Galatians, a book of 
the New Testament, Charles Wesley was "born again" 
into new Christian faith. For 1 7 years, he was a traveling 
minister among the Wesleyan societies. Although he 
differed with his brother on some points, they always 
remained loyal to each other. f. a. Norwood 

See also Asbury, Fr.'^ncis; Hymn; Methodists. 
WESLEYAN COLLEGE is a liberal arts school for 
women at Macon, Ga. The School of Fine Arts admits 
both men and women. It was founded in 1836. It was 
the first college in the world chartered to grant degrees 
exchtsively to women. For enrollment, see Universities 
AND Colleges (table). 

WESLEYAN METHODISTS. The Mediodists in the 
United States after the Revolutionary War adopted the 
episcopal form of organization, with bishops at the head 
of the church. The main body of Methodists in Great 
Britain kept the organization form established by John 
Wesley, the founder of Methodism. The British group 
took the name of Wesleyan Methodists. A group of 
Methodists in the United States withdrew from the 
Methodist Episcopal Church in 1843 over the slavery 
issue. They formed a church without bishops called the 
Wesleyan Methodist Connection. In 1948, the name 
was changed to the Wesleyan Methodist Church of 
America. For membership, see Religion (table [Meth- 
odist]). See also Methodists; Wesley (family). 

WESLEYAN UNIVERSITY is a privately-controlled 
liberal arts school for men at Middletown, Conn. Stu- 
dents live in dormitories and fraternity houses. The 
Methodist Episcopal Church founded the school in 
1831, but now has no formal connection with it. Wood- 
row Wilson taught at Wesleyan from 1888 to 1890. For 
enrollment, see Universities (table). 

WESSEX. See England (The Anglo-Saxon Period). 
WEST, BENJAMIN (1738-1820), was the first Ameri- 
can painter to paint the figures in historical scenes in the 
clothes they normally wore. Artists before him had 
usually painted figures 
dressed in classic Greek or 
Roman robes. But although 
West became famous for 
such pictures as Penn's 
Treaty with the Indians, 
which appears in color in 
the Painting article, and 
The Death of General Wolfe, 
he is best known for his 
ability as a teacher. 

West was born in Spring- 
field, Pa. He taught him- 
self to paint with home- 
made materials. In 1 755 he 
became a portrait painter 



Benjamin West 



Brown Bros. 





llcf-y i.r Canada 

The Death of Wolfe by Beniamin West is one of his famous 
paintings showing historical figures at epic moments. 

in Philadelphia, and four years later moved to New 
York City. He went to Rome in 1 760, and to England 
in 1763. 

In 1772, King George III appointed West his official 
historical painter, and in 1 792 he became president of 
the Royal Academy, which he had helped found (see 
Royal Academy of Arts). His famous American pupils 
in London included Washington Allston, John Trum- 
bull, Gilbert Stuart, Samuel F. B. Morse, and John 
Singleton Copley. john d. Morse 

WEST, REBECCA (1892- ), is a British writer of 
fiction and essays. Both her subject matter and her 
manner of writing have kept her books from becoming 
widely popular, but critics have admired her sensitive 
perception and brilliant style. 

Her works include Henry James (1916); D. H. Law- 
rence: An Elegy (\930); Black Lamb and Grey Falcon (1942), 
a book on Yugoslavia; The Meaning of Treason (1949); 
and such novels as The Return of the Soldier (1918), 
The Judge (\922), The Harsh Voices (1935), The Thinking 
Reed (\936), and The Fountain Overflows (\9bG). 

Miss West was born in County Kerry, Ireland, and 

educated privately. Her name was originally Cicily 

Isabel Fairfield. She 

worked on newspapers and 

mageizines. Joseph E. Baker 

WEST, THE. In American 
history, the unsettled area, 
or frontier, usually lay to 
llie west of settled regions. 
The terms west and frontier 
came to have the same 
meaning. To the first colo- 
nists, the frontier lay be- 
yond the Appalachian 
Mountains. Later, pioneers 
in the Midwest considered 
the plains and mountains 
farther west to be the fron- 
tier. Today, the West usually means the last frontier, the 
plains and mountain region that white men occupied 
after the Civil War. Frontiersmen included fur traders, 
miners, immigrants, cowboys, soldiers, and law officers. 
Their adventures attracted writers, who still tell the 

story of the West. Walker D. Wyman 

See also Pioneer Life; Western Frontier Life; 
Westward Movement, with their Related Articles. 



Rebecca West 




WEST ALLrS, Wis. (pop. 68,157; alt. 700 ft.), is an 
industrial suburb of Milwaukee (see Wisconsin [map]). 
The AUis-Chalmers Company, one of the country's 
largest manufacturers of heavy machinery, is located in 
the city. West AUis has more than 80 industries. 

The Allis-Chalmers Company moved into the area 
from Milwaukee in 1901. West Allis derived its name 
from the organization. It became a city in 1906, It has 
a mayor-council government. james i. clark 

WEST BENGAL. See Bengal. 

WEST BERLIN. .See Berlin. 

WEST CHESTER STATE COLLEGE is a coeducational 
state teachers college in West Chester, Pa. It oflTers 
programs in dental hygiene, education, health, music, 
physical education, and school nursing. Courses lead 
to bachelor's degrees. It was founded in 1871. For en- 
rollment, see LIntversities and Colleges (table). 

WEST COVINA, koh VEE nuh, Calif (pop. 50,645; 
alt. 220 ft.), is a residential city 18 miles east of Los 
Angeles. It lies in the citrus fruit- and walnut-growing 
San Gabriel Valley. West Covina's population in- 
creased by about 45,000 persons from 1950 to 1960. 
Incorporated in 1923, it has a council-manager govern- 
ment. For location, see California (map). 

WEST GERMANY. See Germany. 

WEST HARTFORD, Conn. (pop. 62,382; alt. 150 ft.), 
is a suburb of Hartford (see Connecticut [color map]). 

Noah Webster, who wrote Webster's dictionary, was 
born in a house still standing on Main Street. The first 
free American school for the deaf, founded by Thomas 
Hopkins Gallaudet in 1817, is in the city. 

The West Hartford area was setded as part of Hart- 
ford in 1679. It became a separate town in 1854. It 
has a council-manager government, albert E. Van Dusen 

WEST HIGHLAND WHITE TERRIER is the only all- 
white breed of Scottish terriers. The breed was devel- 
oped from the white puppies that appeared occasion- 
ally in litters of cairn, .Scottish, and Skye terriers. It has 
bright, sharp eyes. The dog carries its tail high and its 
ears straight up. It has a wiry coat about 2 inches long. 
It weighs from 1 3 to 19 pounds. Josephine Z. Rine 

The West Highland White Terrier is noted for its great 
intelligence. It makes a good hunting dog and a faithful pet. 

Evelyn Shafer 




164 




British West Indian Air^vays 

The West Indian Economy depends primarily on farm prod- 
ucts. This girl on St. Vincent balances a load of cotton on her head. 

WEST INDIES are a long chain of islands that separates 
the Caribbean Sea from the rest of the Atlantic Ocean. 
The islands stretch in a 2,000 mile curve from an area 
near the southern tip of Florida and the eastern tip of 
the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico to the coast of \'ene- 
zuela. The West Indies cover a land area of 91,125 
square miles, and have a population of more than 23,- 
500,000. Cuba is the largest island. Sometimes the 
term Antilles is used for all the islands except the 
Bahamas. 

The West Indies consist of three major groups of 
islands: (1) the Bahamas in the north, (2) the Greater 
.Antilles near the center, and (3) the Lesser Antilles 
to the southeast. The Lesser Antilles are divided into 
the Leeward Islands and the Windward Islands. 

Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica, and 
Trinidad and Tobago are independent countries lying 
in the\Vest Indies. Other islands or groups of islands are 
territorial possessions of the L'nited States and several 
European counuies. The L'nited .States governs some of 
the Virgin Islands as a territory'. Puerto Rico is a 
commonwealth of the L^nited .States. British possessions 
include the rest of the \'irgin Islands; the Bahamas; 
the Caicos Islands; the Cayman Islands; the Turks 
Islands; Antigua; Barbados; Dominica; Grenada; Mont- 
serrat; St. Kitts (St. Christopher), Nevis, and Anguilla; 
St. Lucia; and St. \'incent. The Netherlands controls 
two groups of islands called The Netherlands Antilles. 
Martinique and Guadeloupe are overseas departments 
of France. 

The Land and Ifs Resources. The West Indies are the 
peaks of an underwater mountain chain often called 
the Caribbean .^ndes. This chain linked North and 
South America during prehistoric times. Most of the 
islands are of volcanic origin, but Some are formed of 
coral and sand. There are many mountains and inactive 
volcanoes in the \Vest Indies. The islands differ in size, 
sceneiy, and natural resources. But they have the same 
tropical climate and similar forms of plant life. 

Their mild winters make them one of the world's most 
popular resort areas. Temperatures average between 
70° F. and 85° F. along the coasts. But they often fall 
as low as 40° F. in the mountainous interior of some of 
the larger islands. The rainy season, between August 
and October, brings from 60 to 70 inches of rain each 
year throughout most of the West Indies. Violent hurri- 
canes often strike the islands during the rainy season. 



WEST INDIES 

The soil is the most important natural resource in 
most of the islands. Many islands have thick forests 
and lush tropical vegetation. .-Xgricultural products 
grow abimdantly. But agriculture is usually limited 
to the plains and valleys in the mountainous islands. 
Hard\voodssuch as cedar, ebony, and mahogany are the 
chief forest products of the West Indies. Jamaica's 
batLxite and the natural asphalt and petroleum found 
in Trinidad and Tobago are the largest mineral re- 
sources. The islands also have some chromium, copper, 
iron, manganese, and nickel. 

The People. More than 23,500.000 people live in the 
West Indies. They represent many races and nationali- 
ties. Most of the people are of Negro or mLxed-Negro 
ancestr)-. But there are also people of Chinese, Danish, 
Dutch, East Indian, English, French, Portuguese, 
.Spanish, and Carib Indian heritage living in the islands. 
Most of the people speak either English, French, or 
Spanish. Many of them use colorful local dialects. 

Most of the people live on farms and in small vil- 
lages. Living standards on many of the islands are 
poor because die workers receive low wages. Those 
who live in the cities dress much like people who live in 
L'nited .States and Canadian cities. In rural areas, the 
men usually wear blue denim work clothes and most of 
the women wear cotton dresses. 

Most of the people are Roman Catholics. Other 
major religious denominations in the islands include 
Baptist, Episcopal, Methodist, and Seventh-day Ad- 
ventist. 

Work of the People. Most \\'est Indians work on 
farms and plantations. Sugar cane is the most important 
crop. Farm workers on nearly all of the islands harvest 
large crops of sugar cane. Cuba and the Dominican 
Republic are among the leading sugar cane growers in 
the world. Fruit, including bananas, oranges, and grape- 
fruit, is also an important crop. Tobacco is one of the 
leading crops in Cuba, the Dominican Republic, 
Haiti, Jamaica, and Puerto Rico. Other crops include 
cacao, coffee, cotton, molasses, sisal, and vegetables. 
Raising livestock is important in the Bahamas, the 
Dominican Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, and the 
N'irgin Islands. 

.Agricultural production has had a strong effect on 
the industrial development of the West Indies. Many 
industries refine products grown in the islands. .Sugar- 
refining is the leading industry. It produces such items 
as sugar, molasses, and rum. Mining is an important 
industry in Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago. 
Jamaica has large deposits of bauxite, an ore used in 



Name 


Location 


Population 


Havana 


Cuba 


78.5,455 


Kingston 


Jamaica 


421,718 


San Juan 


Puerto Rico 


368,756 


Santo Domingo 


Dominican Republic 


367,053 


Marianao 


Cuba 


219,278 


Santiago de 






Cuba 


Cuba 


163,237 


Port-au-Prince 


Haiti 


134,117 


Ponce 


Puerto Rico 


126.810 


Camagiiey 


Cuba 


110;388 


Port-of-Spain 


Trinidad and Tobago 


92,793 



165 



WEST INDIES 

the manufacture of aluminum. Trinidad and Tobago 
has large deposits of natural asphalt and petroleum. 
Fishing is an important industry- in the Bahamas and 
Jamaica. Other industries in the West Indies produce 
furniture, handicrafts, leather, matches, shoes, soap, 
textiles, and tobacco products. 

Exports from the \Vest Indies include bauxite, ciga- 
rettes, cigars, cocoa beans, coffee, cotton, molasses, 
petroleum products, rum, sugar, and tropical fruit. 
Imported items include food, drugs, automobiles, 
machiner)', chemicals, and clothing. 

The tourist industiy is important in nearly all the 
islands of the West Indies. But during the 1950's 
and 1 960's, the governments of Cuba and Haiti were 
unfriendly toward the United States and other western 
nations, and lost much of their tourist trade. 

History. Christopher Columbus discovered the West 
Indies and claimed them for .Spain in 1492. He called 
them Indies because he thought that they were part of 
the Indies islands of Asia. Arawak and Carib Indians 
lived there when Columbus came. The Spanish estab- 
lished colonies in the islands in the 1500"s. Most of the 
Indians died from disease and overwork under Spanish 
rule. The Spaniards gained great wealth from sugar 
and tobacco grown in the West Indies. They imported 
large numbers of Negro slaves from W^est .Africa to the 
islands to work on their sugar and tobacco plantations. 

During the 1600"s, the English. French, and Dutch 
began to explore the Western Hemisphere, and they es- 
tablished colonies in the West Indies. During the 1600's 




^.lll.^^l.^ Wide Phot.i 

St. George's on Grenodo is typical of many cities in the 
West Indies. It has fine tourist accommodations and an excellent 
boat harbor that makes it popular with yachtsmen. 



Gulf of 
Mexico 



HAVANA 




GRAND BAHAMA t. 

'\ GREAT ABACO I. 



f 



J- .y NASSAU 

IMatanzas 



ELEUTHERA I 
.CAT I. 



V- 




j_ Tropic_ of^ Oancer_ 

ACKLINS 



'^ CAICOS IS. 

fii Q "TURKS IS. 

.^ s ''"■' 




Atlantic Ocean 



P A 



V^c=&gt;' 



N 



Santiago Cy&gt;'~~-f~^S4ntia90 &lt; 
deCuba GONAVE K&lt;.S°Oa) ^g^ ^ 

^&lt;-J^ ^nSrTrr^''/-Bam SANTO 

Black^^Kingston PORT-AU- Lj DOMINGO 

River PRINCE 



Montego Bay •'' 

JAMAICA 



HONDURAS 



A N T I L L 

WEST INDIES 



E S 



PUERTO' 

RICO 
(U.S A.) 



ANTIGUA 




SAN VIRGIN IS. 

JUAN - 
i »? &lt;^*^' % 

'- ^ "• =6T. K1TTS&lt;^&lt;- Q 

(BR.) ■i^'V 
RICO NEVIS " -^O IBR. 

IBR 1 ^ GUADELOUPE 

ttONTSERRAT "^ ,fK ) 

i&gt;"'„ '^asseTerre 

_] U (BB-l 

MA-RT,mOUE^Fort^d|- 

^ ST. LUCl. U BARBADOS 

I Bridgetown 



\ 



1 66 



and 1 700's, Spain began to lose its power as the English 
and French expanded their control. Bold pirates such as 
Francis Drake and John Hawkins helped to weaken 
Spanish power in the West Indies by attacking Spanish 
ships and seizing vast amounts of valuable cargo. Brit- 
ain and France often hired these pirates to disiiipt 
Spanish shipping. The British-held islands became 
known as the British West Indies. 

During the 1800's, revolutions weakened colonial 
control in some of the larger islands. Several independ- 
ent nations were established, including Haiti and the 
Dominican Republic. In the late 1800's, a revolution 
in Cuba helped to bring the United States into the 
Spanish-American War. Cuba became independent 
after that war, and the United States won possession of 
Puerto Rico. In 1917, the United States bought the 
Virgin Islands from Denmark. 

During the 1900's, many dictators gained power in 
the independent counU'ies. Between 1930 and 1961, 
dictator Rafael Trujillo ruled in the Dominican Re- 
public. Several dictators, including Paul E. Magloire 
and Francois Duvalier controlled Haiti during the mid- 
1900"s. Between 1924 and 1959, Cuba suffered under 
several dictators such as Gerardo Machado and 
Fulgencio Batista. In 1959, Fidel Castro ousted Batista, 
and established a communist dictatorship. Cuba soon 
became a satellite of Russia. 

A number of the British-held islands established the 
AVest Indies Federation in 1 958. But Jamaica and Trini- 
dad and Tobago dropped out of the federation when 
they became independent in 1962, and it had to be 
dissolved. The other islands in the federation made 
plans for a new federarion in 1963. But they could not 
agree on the foiTiiation of the constitution, w. L. burn 

RelQled Articles in World Book include: 
Antilles Guadeloupe Trinidad and 

Bahamas Haiti Tobago 

Cuba Jamaica Virgin 

Dominican Republic Martinique Islands 

French West Indies Netherlands Antilles West Indies 
Grenadines Puerto Rico Federation 

WEST INDIES FEDFRATION was a nation composed 
of several British-held islands or groups of islands in 
the West Indies. It was fonned in 1958 as a member 
of the British Commonwealth. The federation included 
(1) Antigua; (2) Barbados; (3) Dominica; (4) Grenada; 
(5) Jamaica; (6) Montserrat; (7) St. Kitts (St. Chris- 
topher), Nevis, and Anguilla; (8) St. Lucia; (9) St. 
Vincent; and (10) Trinidad and Tobago. For the loca- 
tion of the islands, see West Indies (map). Trinidad 
served as the capital of the West Indies Federation, 
"^mjamaica and Trinidad and Tobago dropped out of 
the federation when they became independent in 1962, 
and the federation was dissolved. 

Government. The constitution, ratified in January, 
1958, provided for a two-house legislature. A governor- 
general, representing the British Crown, nominated tlie 
19-member Senate, on the advice of the governor of 
each island unit. The people elected the 45 members 
of the House of Representatives. A prime minister 
-served as the chief executive of the West Indies Federa- 
tion. He was appointed to the post as the leader of the 
majority party of the House of Representatives. 

History. The islands were known as the British 
West Indies during the 1800's. The idea of a general 



WEST TEXAS STATE UNIVERSITY 

federation developed after the British made a federal 
group out of the Leeward Islands in 1871. During the 
1920's and 1930's, many persons opposed federation. 
Those who lived on the wealthier islands feared that 
they might have to support the people who lived on the 
poorer islands. But conferences held in 1947, 1953, 
and 1956 helped to settle such problems by guarantee- 
ing strong local governments for each island. 

The British Caribbean Act of Aug. 2, 1956, allowed 
the British Crown to establish a federation by an order 
in Council (see Great Brit.mn [The Cabinet]). In 
1957, the British cabinet issued an order establishing 
the new country. On Jan. 3, 1958, the governor- 
general assumed his duties and the West Indies Federa- 
tion was formally established. Elections were held in 
March, 1958, and the first government was formed in 
April under Sir Grantley Adams, former prime minister 
of Barbados. 

A constitutional conference decided in 1961 that 
the federation would become independent on May 31, 
1 962 . But then Jamaica voted to secede from the federa- 
tion when it became independent, and Trinidad and 
Tobago also announced that it would seek independ- 
ence. As a result of these withdrawals. Great Britain 
dissolved the federation on Feb. 6, 1962. 

Barbados and the Leeward and Windward islands 
tried to form a new federation in 1963. But their gov- 
ernments could not agree on a constitution, vv. L. Burn 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Barbados Leeward Islands 

British West Indies Trinidad and Tobago 

Jamaica Windward Islands 

WEST IRIAN. See New Guinea (Government). 
WEST LIBERTY STATE COLLEGE. See Universities 
AND Colleges (table). 

WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. (pop. 56,208; met. area 
228,106; alt. 15 ft.), a resort and commercial center, lies 
across Lake Worth from Palm Beach and the Atlantic 
Ocean (see Florida [political map]). It is the farm and 
retail trade center of five southern Florida counties. It 
produces air-conditioning equipment, aircraft engines, 
chemical and machine products, electronics systems, 
and prefabricated buildings. West Palm Beach was 
founded in 1893, and incorporated in 1894. It has a 
council-manager government. Kathryn abbey hanna 

WEST POINT, N.Y., a U.S. military reservation, has 
served as the site of the U.S. Military Academy since 
1802. For location, see New York (political map). The 
reservation stands on a plateau above the west bank of 
the Hudson River, and covers about 15,000 acres. It 
also includes Constitution Island, in the river, site of 
several Revolutionary War forts. See also United 
States Miltfary Academy. 

WEST TEXAS STATE UNIVERSITY is a state-supported 
coeducational school at Canyon, Tex. It offers courses 
in the humanities, sciences, and social sciences, and has 
professional, vocational, and graduate divisions. The 
Panhandle-Plains Historical Society Museum of the 
university has a collection of newspapers, records, 
letters, and other relics of early pioneer days. The 
museum contains 4,000 volumes of source material 
dealing with eariy Southwest history. For enrollment, 
see Universities and Colleges (table). 

167 




:.^iirds Biickhannon, West Virginia by Frod L. Messeisniith for Iho Field Enterprises Educational Corporation Collection 

Bradley Smith, Photo Researchers 



Coal Miner 




I 



WEST VIRGINIA 




THE MOUNTAIN STATE 



WEST VIRGINIA, in the Appalachian Highlands, 
has some of the most rugged land in the United States. 
The state has no large areas of level ground, except 
for strips of valley land along the larger rivers. Moun- 
tain chains cover the eastern section. Steep hills and 
narrow valleys make up the region west of the moun- 
tains. The exu-eme ruggedness of the land gives West 
Vii-ginia its nickname, the Mountain State. 

The state's rough land has made life difficult for West 
Vii-ginians. Much of the ground is too steep and rocky 
for farming. Highways, railroads, and airports are hard 
to build. Floods from mountain sueams often threaten 
valley setdements. But West Virginia's beautiful moun- 
tain scenery and mineral springs attract many visitors. 
Forests of valuable hardwood trees grow on the slopes, 
and vast mineral deposits lie under the ground. 

West Virginia produces more coal than any other 
state. Coal deposits lie under two-thirds of the land, 
and mining towns dot the hills and valleys. West 
\'irginia industries are based on coal and other im- 
portant mineral resources found in the state. These 
resources include clay, limestone, natural gas, petro- 
leum, salt, and sand. 

Industrial cities line the banks of the broad Ohio 
River, which forms West Virginia's western border. 
Wheeling, Weirton, and other northern river cities 
produce iron and steel. Chemical and textile plants 
operate in the Ohio, Kanawha, and Potomac river 
valleys. Charleston, West \'irginia's capital and largest 
city, lies in the Kanawha Valley. The Charleston area 
is a manufacturing center for chemicals, metal products, 
and textiles. 

West Virginia was part of Virginia until the Civil 
War. \'irginia joined the Confederate States in 1861. 
But the people of the western coundes remained loyal 
to the Union and formed their own government. West 
\'irginia became a separate state in 1863. The hardy 
independence of the people who live in West Virginia 
is reflected in the state's motto, Mountaineers Are Always 
Free. 

For the relationship of West \'irginia to other states 
in its region, see the article on Southern States. 

Tiie contributors oj this article are Harry G. Hoffmann, Edi- 
tor of the Charleston Gazette; James Gay Jones, Projessor 
of History at Glenville State College; and Richard S. Little, As- 
sistant Projessor oJ Geography at West Virgmia University. 




West Virginia (blue) ranks 41st in size among all the states, 
and 1 2th in size among the Southern States (gray). 



FACTS IN BRIEF 



Capital: Charleston. 

Government: Congress — U.S. Senators, 2; U.S. Repre- 
sentatives, 5. Electoral \'otes, 7. State Legislature — sena- 
tors, 34; delegates, 100. Counties, 55. I'oting Age, 21 
years. 

Area: 24,181 square miles (including 102 square miles of 
inland water), 41st in size among the states. Greatest 
Distances: (east-west) 265 miles; (north-south) 237 
miles. 

Elevation: Highest, Spruce Knob in Pendleton County, 
4,862 feet above sea level. Lowest, 240 feet above sea 
level, along the Potomac River in Jefferson County. 

Populotion: 1,860,421 (1960), 30th among the states. 
Density, 76 persons to the square mile. Distribution, 
rural, 64 per cent; urban, 36 per cent. Estimated 7965 
Population, 1,786,000. 

Chief Products; Mining, clay, coal, limestone, natural gas, 
petroleum, salt, sand and gravel, stone. Manufacturing 
and Processing, aluminum, chemicals, glass and glass 
products, iron and steel, lumber, petroleum products, 
pottery, textiles, .igriculture, corn, dairy products, 
fruits, hay, livestock, poultry, tobacco, vegetables. 

Statehood: June 20, 1863, the 35th state. 

State Motto: Montani Semper Liberi (Mountaineers Are Al- 
ways Free). 
State Songs: "The West Virginia Hills," words by Ellen 
King: music by H. E. Engle. "This is My West Vir- 
ginia," words and music by Iris Bell. "West Virginia, 
My Home Sweet Home," words and music by Jul- 
ian G. Hearne, Jr. 



169 



WEST VIRGINIA 



Government 



Constitution. West Virginia adopted its first consti- 
tution in 1863, wlien it became the 35th state in the 
Union. The state is now governed by its second consti- 
tution, adopted in 1872. The constitution has been 
amended more than 35 times. Constitutional amend- 
ments may be proposed in either house of the state 
legislature. They must be approved by a two-thirds 
majority of both houses, and then by a majority of the 
voters. The constitution may also be revised by a con- 
stitutional convention. Before a constitutional conven- 
tion can be called, it must be approved by a majority of 
the legislators and the voters. 

Executive. The governor of West Virginia is elected 
to a four-year term. He cannot serve two terms in suc- 
cession. The governor receives a yearly salary of $25,000. 
He appoints the heads of many state administrative 
departments. For a list of all the governors of West 
Virginia, see the History section of this article. 

Other top state officials include the secretary of state, 
auditor, treasurer, attorney general, and commissioner 
of agriculture. These officials are also elected to four- 
year terms. 

Legislature of West Virginia consists of a senate 
and a house of delegates. The voters of each of the 
state's 1 7 senatorial districts elect two senators to four- 
year terms. The house of delegates has 100 members. 
They serve two-year terms. Forty of the state's 55 
coimties have from 1 to 14 delegates, depending on 
their population. The other 15 counties are divided 
into 7 delegate districts with a total of 9 delegates. 

Courts. The highest court in West Virginia is the 
supreme court of appeals. It has five judges elected to 
12-year terms. The court chooses a president from 
among its members. The state has 29 judicial districts. 



Each district has a circuit court headed by a judge 
elected to an eight-year term. The first circuit court, 
in Wheeling, has two judges. Some counties have spe- 
cial courts called inferior courts to relieve the circuit 
courts of some of their workload. These courts include 
intermediate, criminal, common pleas, domestic rela- 
tions, and juvenile courts. West Virginia's lowest courts 
are justice-of-the-peace courts. Justices of the peace are 
elected to four-year terms. 

Local Government. Each of West Virginia's 55 coun- 
ties elects a circuit clerk, a county clerk, and three 
county commissioners. These oflScials serve six-year 
terms. Other elected county officials include a surveyor, 
prosecuting attorney, sheriflf, and assessor. They serve 
four-year terms. 

A 1936 amendment to the state constitution gives 
West Virginia cities with populations of over 2,000 
the right to adopt or change their own charters. This 
right is called home rule. Only 10 West Virginia cities 
have taken advantage of the home rule law. Most of 
these cities have a council-manager form of government. 
Most of the state's other cities have a mayor-council 
government. West Virginia's home-rule cities are not 
so independent as the home-rule cities of some other 
states. This is because the courts continue to uphold the 
right of the state legislature to control many city affairs. 

Taxation. Over 30 per cent of the state government's 
income comes from business, occupation, and sales 
taxes. The federal government provides another 30 per 
cent in the form of grants and other programs. Other 
major sources of state revenue include horse racing fees, 
profits from the state's liquor sales, and taxes on per- 
sonal income, cigarettes, gasoline, insurance, and li- 
censes. 




\\\-s[ Virginia Dfpl. of CummcTcc 

The Governor's Mansion, /eft, is north of the Capitol 
grounds. The two-story, red brick building has six huge 
white columns that support a portico high above the main 
entrance. Inside the mansion, above, is a spacious main en- 
trance hall. The hall is noted for a pair of beautiful pol- 
ished mahogany staircases. 



170 




The State Seal 

Symbols of West Virginia. On the seal, the rock and the ivy 
represent stability and continuity. The rock bears the inscription 
"June 20, 1863," the date on which West Virginia became a 
state. The farmer and miner symbolize the state's industries. The 
crossed rifles and cap of liberty show that West Virginia's freedom 
and liberty were won and will be protected. The seal was adopted 
in 1 863. An adaptation of the seal appears on the West Virginia 
flag, which was adopted in 1929. 

Bird and flower illustrations, courtesy of Ell Lilly and Company 



Politics. Since 1864, West Virginia has divided its 
vote about equally between Republicans and Demo- 
crats in state and national elections. From 1 896 to 1 928, 
tlie Republicans won ever\- state election except one. 
The Democrats won control of the state in 1932 and 
held it until 1956. Cecil H. Underwood, a Republican, 
was elected governor that year. But the Democrats kept 
control of the state legislature and most top state gov- 
ernment positions. William Wallace Barron, a Demo- 
crat, was elected governor in 1960. Another Democrat, 
Hulett C. Smith, succeeded Barron in 1965. For West 
Virginia's voting record in presidential elections since 
1864, see Electoral College (tablej. 



The State Capitol, in Charleston, stands on the north bank of 
the Kanawha River. The gold-embossed dome rises 300 feet and 
is topped by a golden eagle on a bronze shaft. Charleston has 
been the capital since 1885. Others were Wheeling (1863-1870], 
Charleston (1870-1875), and Wheeling (1875-18851. 

West Virginia Dopt. of Commerce 





The State Bird 

Cardinal 




The State Flower 

Rhododendron 



The State Tree 

Sugar Maple 



' ; "''^^^ V.1, 
,.,v» " ■ '■»»"i.'"^'% 



'''''i&gt;'^ 




Mile 



2,5 5 



IVe 



Sifieir 






Cr. 



Pihey Fork&lt;H, oBracHey / ?)= ' ! I 

Adena^ji^ ^eechbotfbrivfc tji^ "Bethanv, 



Pleasant- "^"villei 



Glencoe 



W 



■^Bellah 



fBenwoo 



Shadyslde&lt;&gt;PMcMeclL.,i, , . 
\r&lt;5. .Oy (^^UTM^orsvil 

•if?/,- "TrvJsMoundsviiie 

^ VoMc keefrey \ , 

\ • I M A R S H A L \J.! 

Powjiataf -^ ' 

, - — Poin 



Clarington 



"lyK.. 
Camp 



Proctor W E T Z E 



Dillm 
F. C. Ren. 



Millersburg 



WEST VIRGINIA 



NlJ'5^ CarroJIton 
\w1/ Leesuille 



81° 



@State Caprfal 
o Other Cities 
o County Seat 

. County Line 



HIGHWAYS 

Expressways 

Major Roads 

Other Roads 

^ U.S. 

^ Nat. Interstate 



1 inch = 27 Statute Miles 
5 10 20 



Lambert Conformal Conic Proiection 



Soglerset 

Crooksville"^ 
Newo 
Lexington , 

Shawn^ee Corning 

Newo . 

Straltsvitle ft 

Burr Oakit'^ 



Cambri d&amp;e'^^fcrr--J^ 
Concord 



E. Lrverpqo4^-&lt;'. ^^ 
WellsvilleO/^^V^ster 

-^V^ Irondaie^-A * ! ^OJi^ 

,^_.-_ Q Cumberlanir, 

-- Kcs.AfTTSterdam TorontoT, - 

;eubenvillejf ; 

^^^;;7^^~i F o I la n s bee 

r.^i, ^P"*^?3,9? oPenowa 
Cadiz BrilliantqP ' ' ^ 
Bradleyo X. , .^^ . 
Dillonvaleo /§BteIl^°«™ 
Tlltonsvilley-ElMterj^^^ 

^^Martinsf H I i. 



\Tappari&gt;~^ 
Clende: 

n 

'ied7non( 
fies, 

-V, Clair's vflTe 

■=iy / Bridgeport r\«Triad(ilphi3 

° I BellaireofcBeQwood ; 

Barnesvilleo Bethesda PMclilechen 

Res, 



^-'&gt;'Xwh^if!?l'^&gt;"^« 



\a® 



Caldwell^ 



Beallsvilleo 
\ Woodsfield 



Glen Date ij 
Moundsvme 

^Glen ^ ■--. 

Easton ■ I 

° oCameroh 



:aptina 
Cl3rir,gton/.&lt;&gt;MM?''SHALLj 



s^-^. 



Mariettai 
Williamstowi 

Viennajj 



i Haf,nibal7Nevy Liltlet^yH"idre, 
^ I 7,Martinsville ■ °Burti 

^ U^2 W E T Z [ L ■ 
,**r -OK/^^aOte City Pine oCoburn" 
vT^ VC- Rsa3^r&lt;i_oGrove 

jfe^J yrrSistersville w^.Qjack^onbUfg g 

&lt;l^ i'ljddleboiifne'j^^. Manningt'on 

^V^ All ^1 '■ ■ r 'iA. ^iiti 



rekg,&lt;rg5i?^:'J{'3'"ys| Mountain }'pSfnl° Lumberport^- 

f , ' " Hebton . ■ ^ . 

-^i^^^^^^waliis-En^;"^^ 
ersbuQ MuVpiiytowtr^ ,° Harrisvilltf, m=,.,9 i.'"Sl''»' ^0^ 

ol 0/j'P J " ', 

jateiSj=&lt; y: %"*■■ 



wkhingtoas^liParkersburg . v:7^-JJ!i5B«-^&gt;&lt;fi^ 

W&gt; \_ -JvS^fC^)-^- vCSrfiwailis , Ellenboto [, i , [i o r i li G I: 

Murphytowfi ,° Harrisvilltf, m. 9 ,., v.^:,'- 

'0/i;.D J ?'t'?'T^''Vl;°r""\'" Milton W_«&gt;J»'l'g, 



rtSs 



SO'^ 



Middleport 



Haliwooci 



Havenl 
^Lakinl 



hurrays- „,, 

w*'lle ,,, 9iL«5tm^. _. 

1, „_W!nfy° jQitSR-T, 

^N.Raven^aod Burliin,' 

£^Raver&gt;^ood SprE, 

ii^'vCrestonJ 






i«bethi%-';%-^'C-,l-;5(r^,t(,,lllg^ 

CoK^MiTii?^",^ 
Troy^ 






Bigo _ 

Springs! j^-^ rSand' 
y-q^ «J««WIIJ 
irantsvillii-c*r G I L M f'^R 



ATum 



«ille 



^rpo'ol Re'^dy 



1^^=' 



"^Stijmptown 



► 



Vanceburg 



CM I 



JTICAL WEST VIRGI 
COPYRIGHT BT 
RANO MC NALLT t COM PA^T 

U.S.A. ■ 



MADE I 



I s(2il 

Grejfenupav 
'""' } Ra&amp;iffa 
J Jusseir 

C&gt;" J} fAsjiland 



«fk" V'"^^^)- '^' °Spen&lt;er yrnpldsb.VI^^V^PPe" 
V,\ Ferry ■^\,'-SOn \ ov"^ / R A N E \ -fe \ ExchangeS-i 
&gt;l , M A%SViO N &gt; ISairplarn oZona \ c,U.° 

■SlHogsettt ll oTVibble ! , »Gandeevillel '?r„ 

&lt;i fcApple l.l'GriiKfnr^v "l /°Higby ^^ Minndra^taip 

■■ © Viqats, -^Wal' 

s®oq,--}.v*° ■&lt;.=: 



■ Grove |S7XLand(ng._ ., _- v.-ar^; ^=i»,'Ti ^* 

/"Green . il^noX^il^°"^^JS'S-~^'' - a?o™U'« ,j^ 



Riffle" 
Rosedale 

. Gassawav 



IC A B E L I 



Wiltonp 



aPocatalico 
k Blue C«# 



"*. 



■HacSaJ 



f'^sfJiat ~3 ^" *^ 



Sh^ 



-r 



»«' 



o Sandy 
Hook 
oRedwine 



jC/^West Liberty 



«OJ»richar*,^ V/ G)iffitfsvillet l^"8oJi Qlcott \, 
)?Brancfi/an/- !-•■-■■ -^^ "■■ 



3u'*^»rrr. „\, _-_J^'^J „&lt;e^ Car^de/cn Gauey^CowMflerryvill 

'.or^iwC H A RtE STON .eK'" ,11 C' ■ corfLE KNOB , JoT/terv 



:oal o 



Putney 



oMammctn'V,, T-OSj-S"' 



*»■ 



,** 



Persir 
odSunW 



Webbville v? 



l-lJ/iisaSj&gt;Gay 



^^"I^E.Lynn-L 
W * ¥ NxJ Edi 



K-f' McCorkleo, 
■ - - L N 

JulianJ 



-^ - Adams 



tiltner t." Price"' 
■&lt;&gt;Kangr 



"Rid 



Marmet^ 
sapeake , „ 

- "^ x;helyan» ( jW 
^Comfort „(i&gt;® 'a 
^ Mont9°'Va&gt;', 

kd^jle" 



Di/'eo -'oq 
Grovi 



A 01 CI'WIKIS., 

W??eti&gt;vobd' 

_^QSwnan \ 



yBridgi oM' 



®(gC3 ^ 

,^1 RiciiardsoQf Tri 



Can 
"City 



nel&gt; 
ty I, 



"■"V 



Paintsvut 



iPowelltcn 
-, ^ J Page „ . 
fKaJfprd I^Fp^n^'jII^^ „ 
JeltreyTU" Wtiife'svillirtS-^ fKinasftn^— Gai 

a ■«( Blue 



nsted 



oGle 
0Pe„oMa 



iunt.Kes. y 

° ?e&gt;„°™"&lt;Ff,= 4 

-luinV oClearco &gt;. 

SoVMarfranpe ] 

o-^ oABf^n ^ \ 

»■"(''■ Williamsburl?: 

^- rl FrarM 

[ F N B.l Rl 



% 



'.Salyersville 

^oRoyalton 



ifM Blue _, ' 
Diamond 

Ka"rveylon 

Hazarti^pLothalr 

Glomawr^- 



Prestonsburg 

Martin 

\ 



^i&gt;-.-J^'ap,nan'.3|Sharp,f^-'U«iue" J o^^^3g,^-«^ 
JpnecoikniWss, ■1?"?"';'°? 1! \ ^\ ^M^rfork Mt. Mope ' 

^^rrnil Holaj„°^^lundkl9 Lorado ^Sa'^-P ,,\,' 

'^'"n'-'f Nol^^l •- G^l'^^S-KkleroO,, -d.neco t °f-'"» - ' 

Dfu.^j, Nolan&gt; _i IG ,Omar^ MX°4c?''erstdale &lt;t^ ^ MabscotI 

..Am. BorderlandVDelb'frton^ Barnabus\ °,,,i,°!^"'e on* GlenWhileo „;-Beaver=; . - .- . 

Chatlaroyfv ,A,. "R'qiand '"^"°™ tfo^f ^^"^ Soohia''-s.&lt;„ k oShadv Sprlfcg Aiders*, ---sj a 

,S. Wllliamson'^WiNiWon ■ ^. i ,-4tr??^,'r/lo ala,S'r^„,o HrntonrTalcottf^Sinks &amp;t-&gt;c«9^^r 



LoWlsbu 



oTapiS) Cqoio 



VWayland 



Plkeville~ 
Sbelbiana 



Stone" Thactu 
^^ oMcVelS 

Phelps 



|-*&gt;lindman 

L wh ■ 



nGrundy 



M° 



McHotiSrtso 
Jenkins i 



(WfiS^ Khi^Bffir^eystojeoMatjaka "f*".'"^''^^&gt;.Jov 

dstiawVM „earyS:,&gt;. ^wMfei?. ''' ^ Ji, f CI R s\ j 
-•■■BartWlCarptta °Elb»rl""=;,°S^'» „ Oakvaleo &gt;L-« 

l._.war^^. Filbert \ Jenklrjones o'^^j -- i+--^--f^- 



,sburg* 



«,°jr 



BeoKjndo afjewhafi 

allscreekodSqyirfi 

^ .%^' 

ojewell Ridge 



^Bluefield Wo'll ^ ^ ^ ° 

yr-B? /Osi°" J?Longitude 



c 



f Greenwich 



Especially created for World Book Encycloptdla by Rand MCNally and World Book editors 



, .^pVandergrift Homei 
""-iBearcT Hun Res.Ol- 



mbfliBB , 

Keosingtoni 

&lt;ee5[=^y^,JWilkinsbiirg ; % '^ * 

Ubanon CMcKeespOrt o § 

(IlJCIairtono og^gensburg 

ganonsburg p J^ ^ oYoungwood 

Monongaheta^ ^ -^ ^ 




i^nt,, 

Ten Mile A &lt; ^e.erlyA. £fc-; 



oLandi 
Job"^ Hcleo««H -^^'^^ 'a^ ""--,-Malhia' 

lexander ' „&gt;Oailey,. % ^ sEA/ec^' itract , ."E'^". Y"" 

ivlon algXiilltreBC" 5-«- Simpdao ,fRiverton"3 ^ &gt; .^ 

■IcVenl't'Si'^'J ^V „,a^E'l?J^pr. F,3n\w='^.* ,'o ^ 

L^HeadTj +^ .Frank T/ v » '^ A 

-\ 4SlVfT.irB»1.0 KNOB \ 70WEH ^ 

&gt; -.Clover,,^ V,V/* / 



Ci 
ly' 

: « M i! 'vrr A s C'-p/Boy iinob 

HBlOSPRUlCE »&gt;'T"r^ 

P0 * say FT. «*,- /&gt; / ^ 



©Monterey ^"-"^ 

. SOUNDING KMOB Oj 




R oAlvon 



lite Sul 






WEST VIRGINIA MAP INDEX 



Population 




1,786.000 . 


Estimate 


1965 


1,860.421 . 




I960 


2.005.552 . 




1450 


1.901.974 . 




1940 


1.729.205 




.1930 


1.463.701 , 




I9?n 


1.221. 119 . 






958.800 . 




1900 


762.794 . 




.1890 


6r8.457 . 




I88II 


442.014 . 




. 1870 


376.688 . 




.I860 


302,3 r 3 . 




18,50 


224.537 . 




1840 


176.924 . 




18.30 


136.808 . 




.1820 


105.469 . 




1810 


78,592 




.1800 


55.873 , 




.1790 


Metropolitan 


Areas 




Charleston 


252.925 


Huntington 






Astiland 






(Ky.) . 


254.780 


Weirton. 






Steubenv 


lie 




(Otiio) 


167.756 


Wheeling 


190.342 


Counties 




Barbour . 


.15.474. 


B 4 


Berkeley . 


.33.791. 


R 6 


Boone .... 


.28,764. 


V. ■^ 


Braxton 


.15.152 


C 4 


Broolle 


28.940 


A 4 


Cabell . . . 


108.202. 


r. 7 


Calhoun 


. .7.948. 


C. 3 


Clay 


.11,942. 


n 3 


Doddridge 


,6,970. 


R 4 


Fayette . . 


.61,731 


C 3 


Gilmer 


.8,050. 


C 4 


Grant .. 


8,304 


R 5 


Greenbrier 


.34,446 


n 4 


Hampshire 


.11,705. 


R 6 


Hancocic . 


.39,615. 


A 4 


Hardy . . . 


. 9,308. 


B 6 


Harrison . 


.77,856. 


R 4 


Jacl(son . . 


.18.54! . 


C. 3 


Jetferson 


18.665. 


B 7 


Kanawha 


252.925. 


C, 3 


Lewis .... 


.19.711 . 


C 4 


Lineoln .. 


.20,267. 


r. 7 


Logan . . . 


.61,570. 


n 3 


Marion 


.63,717. 


R 4 


IVIarshall 


.38.041. 


R 4 


Mason . . . 


.24.459. 


(; 3 


McDowell 


71.359. 


n 3 


Mercer 


68.206. 


n 3 


Mineral 


.22.354. 


B 6 


Mingo 


.39.742. 


n ? 


Monongalia 


55.617 


B 4 


Monroe . . 


.11.584. 


n 4 


Morgan . . 


- .8.376. 


B 6 


Nicholas . 


.25.414. 


C 4 


Ohio 


.68.437. 


A 4 


Pendleton 


8.093. 


C 5 


Pleasants 


. ,7.124. 


R 3 


Pocahontas 


1 0. 1 36 . 


n 4 


Preston . . 


27.233 


R 5 


Putnam . . 


.23.561 . 


3 


Raleigh . 


.77.826. 


D 3 


Randolph 


.26,349. 


C, 5 


Ritchie 


.10.877. 


R 3 


Roane ... 


.15.720. 


(-, 3 


Summers 


.15.640. 


l&gt; 4 


Taylor . . . 


.15.010 


R 4 


Tuclter 


. .7.750. 


B .'1 


Tyler 


.10.026. 


B 4 


Upshur .. 


.18.292. 


C 4 


Wayne . . . 


.38,977. 


C 2 


Webster . 


.13.719. 


C, 4 


Wetzel . . 


.19.347. 


.B 4 


Wirt . . 


.4.391. 


R 3 


Wood . 


.78.331 . 


R 3 


Wyoming 


.34.836 


D 3 


Cities and Towns 


Accoville 


800 


n 3 


Acme . . . 


. , , .500. 


n 6 


Ada 


300. 


D 3 


Addison, see 




Webster 






Springs 






Adrian . . . 


.. . .600. 


fi 4 


Affinity .. 


...400. 


n 3 


Albert .... 


.. .250 


B 5 


Albright .. 


304. 


R 5 


Alderson . 


.1.225. 


n 4 


Alexander 


. ...150. 


C 4 


Algoma" 


400. 


D 3 


Allen 






Junction* 


..300. 


n 3 


Alma 


....152 


R 4 


Alpena ... 


75. 


n 5 


Alpheus' . 


....500. 


n 3 


Alpoca ... 


...400. 


n 3 


Alton .... 


....176. 


.C 4 



Alum Bridge .120. .B 4 

Alum Creek , .300, C 5 

Alvon 80. . D 4 

Amandaville* .225 C 3 

Ameagle 500, ,D 3 

Amherstdale . .900. .D 3 

Amma 300, .C 3 

Anawalt* . . .1.062. .D 3 

Anjean 400. C 4 

Anmoore .... 1.050, B 4 

Ansted 1. 511 C 3 

Apple Grove . 600 .C 2 

Aracoma" , , , 350. . D 3 

Areola 100, C 4 

Arista 300, .0 3 

Arnett 250. ,D 3 

Arnoldsburg . 200, .C 3 

Artie 900 .D 6 

Ashford 300. ,C 6 

Ashland" 450, ,D 3 

Ashley 50. A 6 

Athens 1.086, .D 3 

Auburn 139. B 4 

Augusta 250. B 6 

Aurora 350, . B 5 

Avondale" . , ,450. .D 3 

Bakerton 225. .B 7 

Ballard 400. .D 4 

Bancroft" 469 .C 3 

Bandytowti' . .300. .D 3 
Barbours- 

ville 2.331. .C 2 

Barnabus 600. .D 2 

Barrackville . .950. A 7 

Barrett 800, .D 3 

Bartley 900, .0 3 

Bath, see 

Berkeley 

Springs 

Baxter 574. ,B 4 

Bayard 484. ,B 5 

Beards Fork .800. .D 7 
Beaver (Glen 

Hedrick) ,1.230 D 3 

Beckley , , , 18.642. ^D 3 

Beckwith 500. ,D 7 

Beechbottom . .506 A 4 

Beelick Knob' 250, ,D 4 

Beeson 300. D 3 

Belington . . .1.528. B 5 

Bellburn 250. .C 4 

BeJIe 2.559, .C 3 

Bellepoint 900. .D 4 

Belleville B 3 

Bellwood" 300, .D 4 

Belmont 454. B 3 

Bclva' 250 C 3 

Bemis 60. .C 5 

Benbush . 107. B 5 

Bentree 350. .C 7 

Benwood , . .2.850. A 4 

Bergoo 900 C 4 

Berkeley 100. B 7 

Berkeley 

Springs 

(Bath) . . , 1. 138.08 6 

Berwind 950 D 3 

Beryl' 400. .D 5 

Besoco* 400. D 3 

Bethany 992. B 2 

Bethlehem . .2.308. B 2 

Beverly 441 , .C 5 

Bickmore 200. C 7 

Big Chimney' 300. C 3 

Big Creek .450. .C 2 

Big Springs . 225. .C 3 

Bim' 300 C 3 

Birch River 200, ,C 4 

Bismarck 1 13. .8 5 

Black Betsy . .100 C 3 
Blackberry 

City* 300, ,D 2 

Blacksville . . ,211 . .8 4 

Blair 350, .D 5 

Blairton 200. B 7 

Blakeley 600. ,C 6 

Blount 200 ,C 6 

Blue Creek . 310 C 3 

Blue Jay' 300 .D 3 

Blue Pennant 350. D 3 

Bluefield . 19.256. .D 3 

Blueville* 900. .8 4 

Bolivar 754. ,8 7 

Boir 300, D 3 

Boomer , , 1.657. C 3 

Booth' 400. .8 4 

Boothsville , .200 A 7 

Borderland . . .300. .0 2 

Bownemont , , 900. ,C 3 

Bradley 800 . D 7 

Bradshaw . . , 950. .D 3 

Braeholm 300. .D 5 

Bragg* 250 D 4 

Bramwell , .1.195 ,D 3 

Branchland .518. C 2 

Brandonvillc' . 109 .8 5 

Brandywine . . 125. .C 5 

Brenton" 500. ,D 3 

Bridgeport . .4.199. ,B 4 

Bristol 300. 8 6 

Brounland" ..,300..C 3 

Brown 300. .A 6 

Brownton 745. . B 4 

Bruceton 

Mills 209 ,B 5 

Buckeye 350. C 4 

Buckhannon ,6.389,oC 4 



Bud 400, 

Buena 156. 

Buffalo , . .396- 
Bunker Hill 246. 
Burlington . 400. 
Burning 

Springs 200. 

Burnsville . . ,728. 
Burnwell , .699 
Burton ... 160. 

Cabincreek ,800, 

Cairo 418 

Caldwell 500 

Camden 125. 

Camden on 

Gauley 301. 

Cameo 250, 

Cameron . . 1.625. 
Camp Creek . 300. 

Cannelton 400. 

Capels 800. 

Capon Bridge 198. 
Capon 

Springs , , 240 

Captina 

Carbon 550 

Carbondale' 640 

Caretta 1.092, 

Carolina 722. 

Carswell 500. 

Cascade . . .200. 

Cass 327. 

Cassville' 800 

Catawba 150, 

Cedar Grove 1.569. 
Center point .125. 

Centralia 300. 

Century 700. 

Ceredo 1.387. 

Chapmanville 1,241 . 
Charles 

Town 3.329. 

Charleston ,85.796, 
Charlton 

Heights- .600. 

Chattaroy 950. 

Chauncey 800. 

Chelyan . , ,500, 

Cherry Run .100 
Chesapeake .2.699. 
Chester ,3.787. 

Circleville . . 250 
Cirtsville , . ,200. 
Claremont ... 125 
Clarksburg .28.112. 

Clay 486. 

Clear Creek .204. 
Clear Fork , . 425. 

Clearco 150. 

Clearview" ,520, 
Clendenin . . . 1.510 

Clifftop 250. 

Clio 400. 

Clothier ,, . 392. 
Clover Lick ,350. 
Coal City* ...750. 
Coal Fork .1.000. 
Coalburg' . . .450. 
Coalton (Wo- 

melsdorf)' . .354. 
Coalwood* . . 1.199 

Coburn 75 

Coketon , .156. 

Coketown 80. 

Colcord" 500. 

Colliers" 900. 

Colored 

Hill* 1. 115 

Comfort 160 

Cool Ridge .400. 

Copen 30 

Cora* 500. 

Corinne 1.273, 

Corinth 115 

Cornwallts , . , 106. 
Cottageville . , .300 
Cottle- ,500, 

Cowen . .475. 

Coxs Mills , , ,50 
Crab 

Orchard . , 1.953 
Craigsville .... 175. 

Creston 225 

Cross Lanes* .950. 

Crown" 450 

Crown Hill" 600 

Crum 300 

Grumpier* . .800, 

Crystal" 500. 

Cucumber" . . 300. 
Culloden* . , ,700 

Cunard 450, 

Dabney* 200. 

Dade 50 

Dailey 800. 

Dakota' 750 

Dallas 135 

Daniels" 950, 

Danville 507 

Davis 898. 

Davy 1,331 , 

Dawes* 400, 

Deanville 175, 

Decota 350 

Deep Water ,900, 

Dehue* 750, 

Delbarton ...1.122. 
Dellslow 800. 



D 


3 


Oenmar . . . 


..180. 


r. 


4 


B 


5 


Denver 


. . .75 


r. 


? 


i; 


3 


Denver 


.150. 


R 


5 


B 


6 


Despard 


1.763 


R 


6 


u 


h 


Diamond 


900. 


c. 


6 






Diana ... 


. .180. 


r. 


4 


c 


3 


Dille 


,500. 


r. 


4 


c 


4 


Dingess . . . 


.300. 


n 


2 


u 


6 


Dixie 


.850. 


r. 


3 


B 


4 


Dorothy 


.350. 


n 


6 


C 


6 


Dothan ... 


. 500. 


n 


7 


B 


3 


Doff 


. .950 


n 


3 


U 


4 


Drennen . . 


.250. 


n 


7 


B 


4 


Dry Creek . 


.490. 


D 


fi 






Drybranch . 


.800. 


r 


6 





4 


Dryfork . . 


.50. 


r. 


5 


U 


5 


Dunbar ... 


1.006. 


c. 


3 


B 


4 


Durbin 


.431. 


n 


5 


D 


3 


Eagle 


. .250. 


i; 


3 


C 


6 


Earling . . 


.600 


n 


5 


D 


3 


East Lynn . 


. .200. 


r. 


2 


B 


6 


East Pea 












Ridge' .. 


1.500. 


r 


2 


B 


6 


East 








B 


4 


Ramelle . 


1.244. 


n 


4 


D 


6 


East Toronto 




A 


? 


(; 


6 


East View' 


1.704 


R 


4 


D 


3 


Eastbank 


1.023. 





6 


.A 


7 


Eastgulf 


.500. 


n 


3 


D 


3 


Eccles . , 


1.145. 


n 


3 


K 


5 


Eckman' 


1.125. 


n 


3 


a: 


5 


Edgarton' . 


. .400 


n 


7 


c 


4 


Edmond' .. 


.425. 


r 


3 


.A 


7 


Edna 


,190 


c 


7 


c 


3 


Edwight . . 


.70 


D 


6 


B 


4 


Elbert 


.950. 


D 


3 


C 


4 


Eleanor . . 


. .700 


n 


3 


B 


4 


Elizabeth . 


. .727. 


OR 


3 


C 


2 


Elk Garden 


. ,329 


B 


5 


D 


2 


Elkhorn ... 


.900. 


n 


3 






Elkins 


8.307 


or. 


5 


»B 


/ 


Elkridge 


.250. 


n 


6 


oc 


3 


Elkview 


.600. 


n 


3 






Elkwater . 


.125 


r. 


4 


C 


3 


Ellamore 


. .450. 


n 


4 


U 


2 


Ellenboro 


.340. 


B 


3 


D 


3 


Elmira .... 


. . 74 . 


c 


4 


C 


3 


English' 


.700. 


n 


•t 


B 


6 


Enoch 


... 78 . 


V. 


7 


C 


3 


Enterprise 


.900. 


R 


4 


A 


J 


Erbacon 


. .300 


n 


4 


V. 


5 


Erwin 


.150 


R 


5 


U 


6 


Eskdale . . 


.800. 


r 


3 





/ 


Ethel 


.650. 


D 


5 


OB 


4 


Eureka ... 


. .100. 


B 


3 


OC 


3 


Evans 


.200 


C 


3 


D 


6 


Everettville 


.724. 


A 


7 


U 


3 


Exchange 


250. 


i: 


4 


C 


4 


Fairdale . .. 


300. 


D 


6 


A 


4 


Fairlea' 


. .900. 


D 


4 


C 


3 


Fairmont .27.477. 


»B 


4 


D 


/ 


Fairplain 


. 54 . 


r 


3 


C 


3 


Fairview . 


653 


B 


4 


D 


b 


Falling Springs. 






U 


b 


see Renick 








D 


3 


Falling Wate 


rs 100. 


B 


7 


C 


3 


Falls View* 


.525 


r 


3 


C 


3 


Farmington 


.709 


A 


7 






Fayetteville 


1.848 


or 


3 


C 


b 


Fenwick . . 


,505 


i: 


4 


D 


3 


Ferguson . 


150 


r. 


7 


B 


4 


Ferrellsburg 


150. 


&lt;: 


7 


B 


5 


Filbert .... 


. .950 


D 


3 


B 


2 


Fisher , ... 


. , .50. 


R 


ft 


D 


3 


Flat Too . . 


. .250. 


D 


3 






Flat Woods 


.248. 


i: 


4 






Flemington 


.478 


B 


7 


D 


3 


Follansbee . 


4.052. 


A 


4 


C 


3 


Folsom 


. ,300 


B 


4 


U 


3 


Fort Ashby 


.700. 


R 


6 


C 


4 


Fort Gay . . 


.739 


r. 


? 


D 


2 


Foster . . 


. . 1 20 . 


n 


ft 


U 


3 


Four States 


.700 


R 


4 


B 


5 


Frametown 


.500. 


r. 


4 


B 


3 


Francis ... 


,150 


A 


7 


C 


3 


Frank 


.350. 


r. 


5 


(; 


4 


Frankford 


225 


n 


4 


c 


4 


Franklin 


. .758 


op. 


ft 


B 


4 


French Creek 


.500 


r 


4 






Frenchton 


.275. 


r. 


4 


D 


7 


Friendly* 


..195. 


B 


4 


c 


4 


Frozen .... 


,..50. 


c 


3 


c 


3 


Gallipolis 








c 


3 


Ferry .... 


..150. 


r 


7 


D 


3 


Galloway 


.815. 


B 


4 


c 


3 


Gandeeville 


.350. 


t) 


3 


D 


7 


Gap Mills . 


125. 


1) 


4 


D 


3 


Garten ... 


. .500. 


c 


3 


D 


3 


Gary 


1.393. 


n 


3 


D 


3 


Gassaway 


1.223. 


c 


4 


C 


? 


Gauley Bridge 950. 


v. 


3 


u 


/ 


Gauley Mills 


.300. 


r. 


4 


D 


3 


Gem 


.247. 


v. 


4 


c 


; 


Gerrardstown 


.250. 


R 


6 


(; 


5 


Gilbert 


. .874. 


n 


3 


B 


4 


Gilmer 


..250. 


V, 


4 


B 


2 


Gip 




c 


3 





3 


Girta 


.. .24. 


B 


3 


i: 


3 


Gladesvllle . 


.166. 


A 


7 


R 


ft 


Glady 


. .150. 


r, 


5 


U 


3 


Glasgow , . . 


. ,914. 


v. 


fi 


r. 


3 


Glen 


.250. 


r. 


3 


H 


4 


Glen Dale . 


1,905. 


B 


4 


n 


6 


Glen Easton 


.130. 


B 


4 


i&gt; 


6 


Glen Ferris 


. .400. 


II 


7 


1) 


3 


Glen Jean , . 


.900 


n 


3 


D 


2 


Glen Morgan' 


.500. 


D 


3 


A 


7 


Glen Rogers* 


.950. 


D 


3 



.800 
.724 
1.828. 
. ,200 
. .150 

,307 
5.791 
1.105 

866 



.120. 

.300. 
.400. 
.975. 
.200. 

.350. 
.50. 
.500. 



,700 

.800 

601 

. . .407 

1.670 



Glen White 

Glenalum 

Glenville 

Glenwood 

Glovergap 

Gormania 

Grafton 

Grant Town 

Grantsville 

Granville, see 

Mona 

Graydon 200 

Great Caeapon 600 
Green Bank . . 100 
Green Bottom 
Green Spring 
Green Sulphur 

Springs 
Greenview 
Greenville 
Griffithsville 
Grimms 

Landing . 
Gum Spring 

Gypsy „„„ 

Hacker Valley 150 

Hallwood 263 

Hambelton' . .275 

Hamlin 850 

Hancock 136 

Handley 900 

Hanover 300 

Hansford* . . . .900 

Harding 250 

Harman 128 

Harpers Ferry 572 
Harrisville .1.428 

Hartford 376 

Hastings 300 

Haywood 950 

Hazy Creek . . .750 

Heaters 180 

Hebron 

Hedgesville ...342 

Helen' 

Hemp Hill 

Henderson 

Hendricks 

Henlawson 

Henry 

Hepzibah 400 

Herndon 600 

Hernshaw . . . .900 

Hewett 800 

Hico' 800 

Higby 158 

Highcoal 350 

Hillsboro 210 

Hilltop 765 

Hinton 5.197 

Hogsett 15 

Holden 1.900 

Hometown* . . ,750 
Hominy Falls .430 
Hopemont 
Hopewell* 
Hooverson 

Heights* 
Howesville 
Hugheston' 
Hundred 
Huntersville 
Huntington 
Hurricane 
Huttonsvilk . . t-,.. 

laeger 930 

Idamay 800 

Ingram Branch 500 

Inkerman 50 

Institute . . . .2.500 

Inwood 480 

Itman* 900 

Ivaton 

Ivydale 300 

Jacksonburg . .500 
Jamison Mine 

No. 9* 800 

Jane Lew 426 

Jarvisville 250 

Jeffrey 600 

Jenkinjones . . .300 

Jerryville 275 

Job 184 

Jodie 587 

Jolo* 600 

Julian 250 

Jumping 

Branch 500 

Junior 552 

Kayford 400 

Kearneysville . .700 

Kegley" 800 

Kenna 50 

Kenova 4.577 

Kermit 743. 

Keyser 6.192. 

Keystone ... 1.457 

Killarney 712 

Kimball ...1.175 
Kimberling* .600 

Kimberly 900 

Kincaid 600 

Kingston 400 

Kingwood . . ,2.530 

Kistler 1.084 

Kopperston . . .950 

Lakin 50 

Lanark 400 



D 7 

B 6 

C 6 

C 2 

B 6 

D 4 

D 5 

D 4 

C 3 



.650 
.1,230 

1.800 

. .100 

. . .600 

. .475 

. . .100 

.83.627. 

. .1.970 

.242 



C 4 

C 2 

B 5 
»C 2 
.B 6 

C 6 

D 3 

C 3 

C 5 

C 5 

B 7 
'B 3 

C 3 

A 6 

A 6 

D 6 

C 
.8 

B 

D 

D 

C 

B 

D 

B 

B 

D 

C 

D 

C 

C 

D 

C 

D 
OD 

C 

D 

C 

c 

B 
B 



174 



'Does not appear on the map : key shows general location. 



oCounty Seat. 
Source: Latest census figures. 



WEST VIRGINIA 



Landes 150. C 5 

Lansing 472 D 7 

Lantz 30 C 4 

Largent 75. B fi 

Lawton 500 .D 4 

Layland 400, .0 7 

Layopolis, see 
Sand Fork 
Leewood . . .250 .D 6 

Leon 236. ,C 3 

Leopold 50 ..B 4 

Leslie 774, .C 4 

Lester 626. .D 6 

Lctart 125. C 3 

Letter Gap 300. .C 4 

Lewishurs .. 2.259. »D 4 

Liberty 50 .C 3 

Lilly Grove' .1.255. D 3 

Limestone 100. B 2 

Little Birch ...500..C 4 

Littleton 339. B 4 

Liverpool 75. -C 3 

LIzemores 521 . .C 3 

Lockwood 300 C 3 

Logan 4.I85.°D 3 

London 500 .C 6 

Long Run 120 B 4 

Lookout 350. .C 4 

Lorado 700.. D 3 

Lorentz 500. .B 4 

Lost City 125. .C 6 

Lost Creek . . 678 B 4 

Lost River 50, C 6 

Loudenville ....42..B 2 

Louise 140. B 2 

Lowell 250. D 4 

Lumberport .1.031..B 4 

Lundale 500, ,D 3 

Lynn Camp ... .50. .C 2 

Mabic 750 C 5 

Mabscott . 1.591 . D 3 
MacArthur" .1.418..D 3 
MacDoiiald . .400 .D 3 
Macfarlan . . 500 B 3 
Madison . 2.2I5.°C 3 

Magnolia B 6 

Mahan* . 800. C 3 

Maidsville . . 750 B 5 
Maitland- . .. .200..D 3 
Maiorsville ... .100 ,B 2 

Maiden l.OOO.C 6 

Mallory 1.133..D 3 

Mammoth 800 .C 3 

Man 1.486 ..D 3 

Manheim . . .285 B 5 

Manila 300. D 5 

Mannington .2.996 B 4 

Marcus 750. C 4 

Marfork 600. .D 3 

Martrance 400. C 4 

Marlinton ...l.586.°C 4 

Marmet 2.500 C 3 

Marpleton C 4 

Martinsburg 15.179,&lt;&gt;B 7 

Marytown 100. .D 3 

Mason 1.005..B 2 

Masontown ... .841 . .B 5 

Matewan 896. D 2 

Mathias 50. C 6 

Matoaka 613. .D 3 

Maxwelton 100. D 4 

Maybeury 900. D 3 

Maysville 120 B 5 

McAlpin' . 600 3 

McComas 950 D 3 

McConnell . 950. .D 5 

McCorkle 300 C 3 

McDowell ....400. D 3 

McGraws 85 . D 3 

McKeefrey ... 140 .B 1 
McMcchen . .2.999. B 4 
Meadow 

Bridge . 426 D 4 
Meadow Creek 325 .D 4 
Meadowbrook 975 A 7 
Meadowdale" 300. . B 4 
Metz . 300 A 6 

Miami 450 D 6 

Middlebourne .71 [."B 4 
Middleway . . . 760 B 7 

Midkiff 200 C 2 

Midway 500 D 3 

Milam 65 C 5 

Milburn 700. .D 6 

Mill Creek ..817..C 5 
Mill Point .150. C 4 

Millville 500 B 7 

Millwood .. .150 C 3 
Milton 1.7I4..C 2 

Minden . 1.114. .D 3 

Minnora 500 C 3 

Mitchell 

Heights' 290. .D 3 

Mole Hill. 
see Mountain 

Mona 806. A 7 

Monaville . 825 .D 5 

Monclo 721 .D 3 

Monongah 1.321 B 4 

Montcalm* .800 D 3 
Montcoal .450 .D 3 

Montgomery .3.000 C 3 
Montrose' . 1 14 . C 5 

Moore B 5 

Moorefield . 1.434 "B 6 
Morgantown 22.487 "B 5 
Moscow 30. .A 2 



Mossy 50. ,D 6 

Moundsville 15. 163. "B 4 
Mount Clare . 900. B 4 
Mount Gay . .3.386 .0 2 
Mount Hope .2,000 .D 3 
Mount Lookout 404 C 4 
Mount Storm . .200 B 5 

Mountain 200. B 4 

Mullens 3.544..D 3 

Murohytown . .200. B 3 
Murraysville . 115..B 3 

Nallen 350 C 4 

Naoma 600. .D 6 

National 60. B 4 

Neals Run 50. B 6 

Necdmore 600. B 6 

Nellis 550. .D 5 

Nestorville . .. .250 B 5 

Nettie 600. C 4 

New Cumber- 
land . . ,2.076 OA 4 
New Haven . .1.314 C 3 
New Martins- 
ville 5.607. "B 4 

New Milton 45. B 4 

New 

Richmond" .800..D 3 

Newburg 494 .. B 5 

Newell . . . . 1.842. A 4 

Newhall 500. .D 3 

Newlon 136. C 4 

Newton 350. C 3 

Newville 75. C 4 

Nitro 6.894. C 3 

Nolan 787. .D 2 

North 

Matewan* . 900. .D 2 
North Ravenswood. C 3 
Northfork' .798. .D 3 

Norton 600 C 5 

Nutter Fort .2.440. B 4 
Oak Hill , . 4.71 I .D 3 

Oakvalc 267. .D 4 

Oceana 1.303. .D 3 

Odell C 6 

Olcott .150 C 3 

Omar 900. .D 3 

Ona 100. C 2 

Orgas 200. .D 6 

Orleans Road , 35. B 6 
Ortin Heights' 160. .C 3 

Osage' 614. .B 5 

Ottawa 400. .0 5 

Owens C 3 

Paden City . .3.137. B 4 

Page 800 C 3 

Pageton* 400. D 3 

Palestine B 3 

Parkersburg 44.797 "B 3 

Parsons 1.798.0B 5 

Paw Paw 739. B 6 

Pax 4C»i..D 6 

Peach Creek . . .700. .D 5 
Pennsboro . . .1.660. B 4 

Persinger 400. .C 4 

Peru C 5 

Petersburg . . 2.079. »B 5 

Peterstown 616 D 4 

Peytona 150 D 6 

Philippi ... 2.228. »B 4 

Pickens 500 C 4 

Piedmont . .2.307..B 5 
Pierce . . . 215 B 5 
Pine Grove 760 B 4 

Pineknob 300 D 6 

Pineville . . .1.137.0D 3 
Piney View .809. .D 7 
Pipestem . . .250. .D 4 

Plymouth 200. C 3 

Poca 607 -C 3 

Pocotalico 100. ,C 3 

Point 

Pleasant . .5.785. "C 2 
Pond Gap 100. C 6 



Powellton . .1.256 C 3 

Power 750. A 4 

Powhatan* 600. D 3 

Pratt- 602 C 3 

Premier* 700 .D 3 

Prenter 400 C 3 

Price 165 C 2 

Price Hill 300. .D 3 

Prichard 400. C 2 

Princeton , . . 8.393. "D 3 

Procious 300. C 7 

Proctor 500. C 1 

Prosperity 900. .0 7 

Pughtown 300. A 2 

Pullman 162. B 4 

Pursglove 661 .. B 4 

Putney 200 C 3 

Queen Shoals . .200 C 3 

Quick 450. C 6 

Quinwood 506 C 4 

Rachel 950 A 7 

Racine 975 C 3 

Ragland 800. D 2 

Rainelle 649 . D 4 

Raleigh 750. .D 7 

Rand 3.000.,C 6 

Ranger 150. C 2 

Rangoon 100 B 4 

Ranson . .1,974 B 7 

Ravenswood .3.410..C 3 

Raywood 700. C 5 

Reader 500. .B 4 

Ream* 800. D 3 

Red House ...250..C 3 
Red Jacket . .950 .D 2 

Reed C 6 

Reedsville 398. B 5 

Reedy 352. C 3 

Renick (Falling 
Springs) . . . .265 C 4 

Rhodell 626. .0 3 

Richwood - .4.1 IOC 4 
Ridgeley ... 1.229 B 6 
Ridgeview ....350..C 3 

Riffle 75. C 4 

Rio 156 B 6 

Ripley 2.756. "C 3 

Riverside B 4 

Riverton 300. C 5 

Rivesville 1.191 . B 4 

Roanoke 300 C 4 

Robinette* . . . .800. .D 3 

Rockdale* 220 A 4 

Roderfield* ..1,020. ,D 3 

Romney 2.203. "B 6 

Ronceverte . 1.882 D 4 
Roneys Point .125. B 2 

Rosedale 175. C 4 

Rosemont . .250. B 7 
Rossmore' 500. . D 5 

Rowlesburg 970 .B 5 

Rupert 921 D 4 

Sabine 440. .0 3 

Sabraton 1.810 A 7 

St. Albans . . 15.103. C 3 
St. Marys . .2.443.'&gt;B 3 

Salem 2.366 B 4 

Salt Rock 150. C 2 

Sand Fork . . . 237 C 4 
Sandstone . 500. .D 4 

Sandyville 175. C 3 

Saxman 29 C 4 

Saxon 225 .D 3 

Scarbro 909 D 7 

Seebert 100. C 4 

Selbyville 93. .C 4 

Seth 800. C 3 

Shady Spring 850 D 3 

Sharon 612 D 6 

Sharpies 500. .D 3 

Shaw 225 B 5 

Shepherds- 
town 1.328 B 7 



Shinnston .. .2.724. B 4 

Shirley 137. .A 6 

Short Creek ...500..B 2 

Silica C 4 

Simoda 70. .C 5 

Simpson 400. B 7 

Sinks Grove . . . 96 .D 4 

Sissonvillc 140, ,C 3 

Sistersville . .2.331. B 4 

Skelton 590. .0 7 

Slab Fork* . . .450 D 3 

Slaglc 400 D 5 

Slate 296 B 3 

Sleepy Creek . .200. B 6 

Smithburg 250. B 4 

Smithers . 1.696. C 3 
Smithfield ...361. A 6 

Smithville 400 B 3 

Smoke Hole .200. C 5 

Sophia 1.284. .D 3 

South 

Charleston 19.180. C 3 
South Parkers- 
burg (part 

of Parkersburg) , . .B 3 
Spanishburg . . .400 D 3 

Spelter 500. B 4 

Spencer 2.660.°C 3 

Sprague 3.073. D 7 

Sprigg 350 ,D 2 

Spring Dale ,950, D 4 
Springfield . .300..B 6 

Squire 900 D 3 

Stanaford 950 D 3 

Star City 1.236. B 5 

Stave' 900. D 3 

Stephenson* . . .600. D 3 

Stiltncr 400. .0 2 

Stirrat* 900 . D 3 

Stollings 900 . D 5 

Stonccoal 300. D 2 

Stonewood , .2.202. B 7 
Stotesbury* ...300..D 3 

Stumptown 66. -C 3 

Sugar Grove . . . .75. .C 5 
Summerlee ....747..D 7 
Summers- 
vine 2 008. »C 4 

Summit Point .250. .B 7 

Sun 585. .D 7 

Suncrest C 4 

Sundial 250 D 6 

Superior* 900 . D 3 

Surveyor 120 D 6 

Sutton 967. °C 4 

Swandale 350. C 4 

Sweetsprings .500. . D 4 

Swiss 325. C 3 

Switchback .525 D 3 

Switzer' 1.131- D 3 

Sylvester 316. D 6 

Tad 654. C 6 

Talcott 600. D 4 

Jams 500. .D 3 

Tango 100. C 3 

Tanner 86 C 4 

Ten Mile 50. C 4 

Terra Alta . .1.504. B 5 

Thacker 500 D 2 

Thayer 300. D 7 

Thomas 830. B 5 

Thornton 300. A 7 

Thornwood C 5 

Thorpe' . I.I02..D 3 

Thurmond* ...I89..C 3 

Tioga 350.. C 4 

Triadelphia . .600.. A 4 

Tribble 161. .C 3 

Triplett C 3 

Tripp 25. D 2 

Troy 133 B 4 

Tunnelton .. . .359 B 5 
Turtle Creek . . .75 D 5 



•Does not appear on the map: key shows general location. 
Harpers Ferry Lies Where the Shenandoah 



Tyler 

Heights* . 1.500.. C 3 

Uneeda 250. D 5 

Union 411.00 4 

Upper Tract . .117 C 5 

Vadis 125. .B 4 

Valley Bend . .350. C 5 
Valley Grove .548. A 4 
Valley Head . .800. C 4 

Vallscreek 729. .D 3 

Van 940. D 6 

Vaughan 140.. C 7 

Venus' 800. D 3 

Verdunville .2.260. D 2 

Verner 600. D 3 

Vicars 300.. C 3 

Vienna 9.381 ..B 3 

Vinton 20. C 4 

Virginia 

Heights* . 250..C 3 

Vivian* 900. D 3 

Volga 139. B 4 

Waiteville 500. .D 4 

Walkersville ..190..C 4 

Wfallace 525. B 4 

Walton 375 C 3 

War 3.006 D 3 

War Eagle , . 300. D 3 

Ward 1.109. C 6 

Wardensville . .289. B 6 
Washington . .300 B 3 

Watson 900 A 7 

Waverly 300 B 3 

Wayne 1.274.0C 2 

Webster Springs 

(Addison) 1.I32.»C 4 
Weirton . .28.201 . A 4 

Welch 5.313 °D 3 

Wellsburg . . .5. 514. "A 4 

Wendcl 300. B 7 

West Hamlin .788. C 2 
West 

Liberty .. .1.500. ,B 2 
West Logan* 855. D 3 
West Milford . .367..B 4 
West Pea 

Ridge* 750 C 2 

West Union . 1.186 oB 4 

Weston 8.754 »B 4 

Westover . 4.749. B 5 
Wharton ... 1.055. D 6 
Wheeling . 53.400. »A 4 
White 
Sulphur 

Springs . .2.676. D 4 
Whitesville . . ,774, ,D 3 
Whitmans* ...500. D 2 

Whitmer 250. C 5 

Widemouth .400 D 3 

Widen 600. .C 4 

Wilcoe- 800. D 3 

Williams 

Mountain . . .150 D 6 
Williamsburg .250 D 4 
Williamson .6.746,°D 2 
Williamstown 2.632. B 3 
Wilsondale .. .300 D 2 
Windsor 

Heights 780. B 2 

Windy 17 B 3 

Winfield . . .318 °C 3 
Winifrede . 200. D 6 
Winona . 650 .. C 4 

Wolf Summit .600. B 6 
Womelsdorf. 

see Coalton C 5 

Woodruff .. lOO.C 2 

Worth* 700 D 3 

Worthington . 361 . .A 7 

Wyco 450. . D 3 

Yolyn- 800 D 3 

Yukon* 400. D 3 

Zela 250. C 7 

Zona lll.C 3 

oCounty Seat. 
Source: Latest census figures. 

River, left. Meets the Potomac River, right. 

West Virginia Dept. of Commerce 





Outdoor Festivals are among the favorite events of 
West Virginians. These men are barbecuing hundreds 
of chickens, the featured meal at the Poultry Festival 
held in Moorefield every summer. 



WEST VIRGINIA 



People 



The 1960 United States census reported that West 
Virginia had 1 ,860,42 1 persons. The population had de- 
creased 7 per cent from the 1950 figure, 2,005,552. West 
\'irginia, Arkansas, and Mississippi were the only states 
that had a decrease in population during this period. 
Many persons who left West Virginia went to northern 
and western states to find jobs. The U.S. Bureau of the 
Census estimated that by 1965 the state's popularion 
had dropped to 1,786,000. 

Almost two-thirds of the people of West Virginia live 
in rural areas. The state has over 230 towns and villages 
with populations of less than 5,000. Many are coal- 
mining towns and trading centers for farm areas. West 
Virginia's large cities lie in river valleys, where the land 
is least hilly. They are centers for the chemical, iron, 
steel, and textile industries. Charleston and Huntington 
are the largest cities. See the separate articles on West 
Virginia cities listed in the Related Articles at the end of 
this article. 

The areas around Charleston, Huntington, Wheel- 
ing, and Weirton are Standard Metropolitan Statistical 
Areas as defined by the U.S. Bureau of the Budget (see 
METROPOLn-AN Area). For the populations of these 
metropolitan areas, see the Index to the political map of 
West Virginia. 

Almost all West Virginians were born in the United 
States. Many of their ancestors came from Germany, 
Great Britain, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, and Poland. 
Large numbers of immigrants came to the state in the 
late 1800's and early 1900's to work in the coal mines. 

Methodists and Baptists are the largest religious 
groups in West Virginia. Other major religious bodies 
include Roman Catholics, Presbyterians, Disciples of 
Christ, Evangelical United Brethren, and Lutherans. 

176 




Phdt s I \ \\».st Viiginia Dcpt of Commerce 

Skill at Handicrafts is part of the heritage of many 
West Virginians. These women are threading a small 
hand loom. They are expert weavers, using techniques 
handed down through many generations. 



POPULATION 

This map shows the population density of West Virginia, and 
how it varies in different parts of the state. Population density 
is the average number of persons who live on each square mile. 

PERSONS PER 
SQUARE MILE 

t'M'to 650 



SO to 100 




60 75 Miles 

25 60 76 100 Kilometers 

WORLD BOOK mui) 




West Virginia University's Medical Center, near Morgan- 
town, was completed in 1961. Four pylons, depicting the history of 
medicine, guard the entrance to the main building. 



Marshall University, righf, in Huntington, was named for Su- 
preme Court Justice John Marshall. A marble bust of the famous 
jurist stands inside the entrance to the 25-acre university grounds. 



WEST VIRGINIA/^j^^^^;^^ 



Schools. Pioneer children in the West \'irginia region 
attended classes in log cabins that served as both 
schools and churches. Parents paid the teachers in cash, 
in farm products, and with "bed and board." In 1 796,. 
the \'irginia legislature passed a law providing for free 
district schools in counties that wished to establish 
them. But few schools \\ere set up, because most county 
officials believed parents should pay only for the edu- 
cation of their own children. In 1810, the legislature 
created a literary fund for the education of poor chil- 
dren. 

West \'irginia established a firee school system in 
1863. after joining the Union. The state constitution 
of 1872 provided tax funds to support the schools. Until 
1875, children in rural schools were not divided into 
different grades. Alexander L. Wade, school superin- 
tendent of Monongalia Count\% worked out a system 
of teaching subjects of various grade levels to children 
of different ages. 

Today, a state superintendent of schools, appointed 
by the state board of education, supervises die public 
school system. The counties receive state funds to main- 
tain minimum educational standards and to buy 
textbooks for children whose parents cannot afford 
them. Children between the ages of 7 and 1 6 must at- 
tend school. For information on the number of students 
and teachers in West \'irginia, see Education (table). 
Libraries. A subscription library was operating in 
Wheeling as early as 1809. Members of this library- 
contributed money to buy books, which they could 
use without charge. Public libraries did not become 
common imtil after 1900. NVest \'irginia established a 
state library- commission in 1929 to help set up state 
and local libraries. 

Today, about 75 public library systems serve the 
people. Many county libraries provide bookmobile 
service for areas that lack libraries. The West \'irginia 





^^^ 










'"is Jk 




^■H ■ 


- *?*r-'fCj 


■■■ 


i 


^^' ' ^ 


y 


11 


% ' 


^m 


■, 
1 


^H 



Photos by West Virginia Dept. of Commerce 



University Library' has the largest collection in the state. 
Large public libraries Include those at Charleston. 
Clarksburg, Huntington, Parkersburg, and Wheeling. 
Museums. The state museum in the Capitol has col- 
lections that feature \Vest \'irginia history-. This mu- 
seum also has several industrial exhibits. The biology 
museum at West \'irginia University displays mounted 
specimens of animals ai-id plants. Other museums in 
West \'irginia include the Hawks Nest Museum at 
Hawks Nest State Park in Fayette County, the Museum 
of the Hills in Richwood, the Mansion House in Wliee- 
ling, and the Centennial Cabin Museum at Parkers- 
burg. .\rt collections are displayed at the Marshall 
Universit&gt;- Art Museum and the Huntington Galleries, 
both in Huntington, and at the Sunrise and Charleston 
galleries in Charleston. 



UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES 

West Virginia has 17 regionally accredited universities 
and colleges. For enrollments and further information, see 
UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES (table). 
Name 

Alderson-Broaddus College 

Bethany College 

Bluefield State College 

Concord College 

Davis and Elkins College 

Fairmont Stole College 

Glenville Stale College 

Marshall University 

Morris Harvey College 

Salem College 

Shepherd College 

West Liberty Slate College 

West Virginia Institute of 
Technology 

West Virginia State College 

West Virginia University 

West Virginia Wesleyon College 

Wheeling College 



Location 


Founded 


Philippi 


1871 


Bethany 


1840 


Bluefield 


1895 


Athens 


1872 


Elkins 


1904 


Fairmont 


1867 


Glenville 


1872 


Huntington 


1837 


Charleston 


1888 


Salem 


1888 


Shepherdstown 


1871 


West Liberty 


1837 


Montgomery 


1895 


Institute 


1891 


Morgantown 


1867 


Buckhonnon 


1890 


Wheeling 


1954 



177 




Pheasant Hunting in West Virginia 



Blackwoter Falls State Park 



Dennis K, Scnit, Alpha 



Showboat Rhododendron in Webster Springs 



Scoit. Alpha 




WEST VIRGINIA/^ y.^.^^^,^ ^^.^^ 



Beautiful scenery, mineral springs, and a variety of 
wildlife attract tourists, campers, hunters, and fishermen 
to the mountains of West Virginia. Miles of trails and 
bridle paths wind through mountain parks and forests. 
Ski slopes near Beckley, Davis, Morgantown, and 
Wheeling are open during the winter, usually from 
December to March. Glass factories and other West 
X'irginia plants offer tours and lectures. At Beckley, 
visitors can take a trip through the underground pas- 
sageway of an exhibition mine. Exhibits there show the 
development of coal mining. 

PLACES TO VISIT 



June Folk Festival in Glenville 

West Virgil 



a Department of Coi 




Following are brief descriptions of some of West 
Virginia's many interesting places to visit. 

Berkeley Springs, a health resort city in Morgan 
County, was long called Bath after the famous watering 
place in Great Britain. George Washington noticed the 
health-giving qualities of the springs when he surveyed 
the land for Lord Fairfax. In 1 756, Fairfax granted the 
site of the town to die Virginia Colony. But he pro- 
vided that the springs were "to be forever free to the 
publick for the welfare of sviffering humanity." Lord 
I'airfax bathed apart from the other health seekers in a 
rock-lined hollow now called the Fairfax Bathtub. The 
Old Hot Bath House has sunken Roman baths. 

Blennerhassett Island, in the Ohio River near Park- 
ersburg, was the site of a mansion built by Harman 
Blennerhassett about 1800. Blennerhassett, with Aaron 
Burr and others, was suspected of planning an inde- 
pendent government in the southwestern United States. 

Cass, in Pocahontas County, has a state-owned sce- 
nic railroad powered by a steam locomotive. The train 
runs through beautiful mountain country on the tracks 
of a former logging railroad. 

Charles Town, the county seat of Jefferson County, 
was founded in I 78(3 by Charles Washington, younger 







*^l 




Harpers Ferry National Historical Park 

brother of George Washington. A jury at the Jefferson 
County Courthouse found John Brown guihy of murder 
and treason after his 1859 raid on Harpers Ferry. Three 
stone marlvers designate the site of the John Brown Gal- 
lows. Several historic homes stand in the area around 
Charles Town. George Washington designed Harewood, 
built about 1770, for his brother Samuel. Dolley Payne 
Todd and James Madison were married in this house in 
1 794. Charles Washington built Mordington, or "Happy 
Retreat," about 1774. Bushrod Washington, grand- 
nephew of the President, built Claymont Court in 1820. 

Ice Mountain rises on the North River in Hampshire 
County. Ice can be scooped from among the rocks at 
the foot of the mountain on even the hottest days. This 
natural refrigeration is caused by cold air currents mov- 
ing through open spaces underground. 

Jackson's Mill, near Weston, was the family farm 
where General Thomas J. "Stonewall" Jackson spent 
his boyhood. In 1921 this area became the first state 
4-H Club camp in the United States. 



Jack Zehrt, FPG 

Seneca Rock, in Pendleton County, towers a thou- 
sand feet above the valley below. This landmark has 
many colorful layers of rock. 

National Forests and Historical Parks. Monongahela 
National Forest lies entirely within West Virginia. It 
covers nearly 1,642,000 acres in the eastern part of the 
state. Parts of George Washington and Jefferson na- 
tional forests extend into West Virginia from Virginia. 
See National Forest (table) . 

The town of Harpers Ferry is famous in Civil War his- 
tory. Harpers Feriy National Historical Park occupies 
about 1 ,500 acres in and arovmd the town. 

State Parks and Forests. West Virginia has 20 state 
parks, nine state forests, and a state recreation area. 
Among the best kno\vn is Blackwater Falls, near Davis. 
There, sparkling water tumbles 63 feet over a rocky 
ledge. For fiuther infoiTnation on the state parks and 
forests of West \'irginia, write to Chief, Division of 
State Parks and Recreation, Department of Natural Re- 
sources, State Office Building. Charleston. W. Va. 25305. 



ANNUAL EVENTS 



The Mountain State Forest Festival, held early in 
October at Elkins, is among the most colorful annual 
events in West Virginia. Most of the festival takes place 
on the campus of Davis and Elkins College. The festival 
includes a horse show, riding tournaments, wood-chop- 
ping and sawing contests, and archeiy and shooting 
exhibitions. Other annual events in West Virginia in- 
clude the following. 

January-May: Winter Ski Carnival in Davis (Feb- 
ruary); Music Festival in Wheeling (April); Creative 
Arts Festival in Charleston (last week in April); May 
Music Festival in Charleston (May). 

June-August: Strawberry Festival in Buckhannon 
(June); West Virginia Day, state-wide (June 20); Folk 
Festival in Glenville (end of June); Honey in the Rock, 



a play about West Virginia history, at Grandview State 
Park (June through September); Rhododendron Festi- 
val in Webster Springs (July); Poultry Festival in 
Moorefield (July or August); West Virginia State Fair 
in Levvisburg (August); State Dairy Cattle Show at 
Jackson's Mill, near Weston (August). 

September-December: Oglebay Park Horse Show in 
Wheeling (September); Preston Coimty Buckwheat 
Festival in Kingwood (September) ; Tomato Festival in 
Berkeley Springs (September); Ohio River Regatta in 
New Martinsville (September); All West Virginia Boat 
Racing Championships in Charleston (October) ; Black 
Walnut Festival in Spencer (October) ; Tobacco FesUval 
in Huntington (November) ; Apple Hai-vest Fesdval in 
Martinsburg (November) . 

179 



T3 

c 
o 

-^ 
0) 

&lt; 

Z 

o 
&gt; 



OOUCQCJOQQ COUCQO UOUOEO OQOOQ 



U OUOCOCOCQ U^ 



X 

0) 

c 

a 
o 
2 



■o&gt; oo-^^ fe oSrt o o = £ 















OOQOOOtJ OOOOCflUCDOOCDOQQmOCJDCQCOCDCQtDO UOO 



*-_ ' — a _i 












0=0:" , 

t- o o 
o c = 



■o-a 






rt (U c 



-S ^ 

t; o 



bo 



i3 r^ rt c; c 



§s s 



&lt;u 



rt ^ 



&amp;2 



S .2 &amp; •- " -e; 

^Jo^ ^ g 

.ij Oi u ca u .2 

" S^-^ a c " 

to 



5 ^ Ti 



' 1 &gt;-■ ^ *, 

p -^ nj ^ 



73 S 

4J O 

bJD OJ 



&gt; S CO B u ti 13 
o Ki . a a. S &gt; 

O oj n tn i&lt; !r^ 



si 
\ bo , 



G 
~ bo 



i,S « ^ r; 



Ki 



^ wj-^; s 



"^ J; ^ O 



-t: -a c :5 



a 
&lt; 






c .3 bo.S 
Q j3 bo &gt; 

-S u 2 &lt;^ "^ w ^ 

■a "3 =« - g- o .^ 

■o,j?rj:: u oj _ o 

■^&lt; tl =3 -C C o 

g u rt &gt; r-i ,/, "* 




rr-t I Lri 

is. -3 

- c S 

S .2 a 
S-g^ 

a. a— 

"^S iJ '^^ 
"^ +3 u 

1'- ^ 
.2 &lt;2 -u 

■S K a 

bp n! S 



CO 


a&gt; 


G 


&gt;- 


jt 


O 


_1J 




+-&gt; 




(2 


U5 


&gt; 







T3 V 






ca -a 



C 3 
O ^ 
bo 



CO -a 



V 



be 

&gt; M 
-I 



(U 









J3 ^*H 



^ S5 



52 J 

c o 

O =) 

.£ - 

^ ca 

o S 

O 
Si 



O 
, , G 
O 

"C c 

s ^ 
s 

t &lt; "c 

, 0^ ^ 

1 a ? 

; T3 s! 

I c ^ 



.2 % 



O -^ 
cfl O 
b ^ 

G 



■s-s 

&gt; a 



« 6 B 

" J^ 4- 

ij ^ S 

S B K 



(fl 



£&lt; 

G ^ 
O ^-^ 






-«!",/• 



O 

".^ o 



itS 



^' 



c .5 6 



be 



G TD ■ 
• ^ r; CO 



■5 

o ro 
G u 

TO ^ 
&gt; 03 

&gt;,&amp;, 

c k 



C3 ca 
03 



' .£ G 






6^^ 



" 5 &gt; 

— bc o 
■ &gt; B 
G (LJ G 

&gt;^ 8 
&gt; 2 



.-4 ra 

-S &gt; 

C 



Ul. 



S bO'y 
§ &gt; ^ KJ U 

U S bO 2 en "J T-l 
,, M -0 G n! „ " 

^ W 'rV -a -^ bO S 

^ §-:!« t^ J S 

= 2 li 2 &gt; a-S 
&gt; M bo-G &lt; -i-i 



o ^ 

■s S K ?i c a 

£§ ,, .23 h ^ G 

_ X •£ c ca ii 

=S hn ° ii *"^ &lt;^ 

-^ ^ ^ C '1^ ^ 

^3 ■'-' 1-H ra ai 



i"3 bo 
&gt; G 



2S 4J 

^ Ji 






5 



O 
to ? 






&gt; &gt; 



_go bo;^ g ifl s 



t. ■ • ho &lt;-&gt; 
c -; K G :a n 



SB 
cj &lt; 
c 



.2 u bo.2 ::„5i c 

-S ^ ^ ^, '^ V G 






e s 



'^ -g M ^ jj 



C 

.« "2 
■g^ g 
"O ,„ o 

&lt;+- o « 
o a 2 

■^ G 

G B.i 

i o 



V &gt; 



o ^ 



o o 

I-H ■&lt;-» 



n ij ? 

a bo M 

^ 'C G 

C tJ 9 

'^ -S ^ 

« en ? 

.If ^ ^ 



o ha 






(U ' 



J3 T3 W 



j; u C -M c 



JS V '^ SI 

N -o " &lt;-■ nj „ 

? ^ y o u 






r3 ^ 

a2 
bo . 

S c 

^2 

.G U 
S G 



§3 I 



S a a 



XI 
.ii! G 

2 O 
_ bO 

T3 ^ 

" U 

03 T3 
JG C 

o ™ 



+-* r&gt; (-! 



« i a Si'n ^ 

-0 -^ ■^ "9 &gt;" 

s ^ ^ s "S 

c bo ? .2 2 

G G -Go 

o o S3 o Oi 
S13 3-2 &gt;, 

y CI. G 

o a u 

*j &lt; bo 

C ,. aj 



1 JG .!i 



O bOr^ • 



[Jh o bo &gt;~ u 
U 03 ^ 



,2 T3 &lt; /^ 






O o 
G H XI 



(u u :5 

3 bo 3 

03 ^ O 

&gt; 'G o 



B -0 



3 u S o u 
■p ■^ f^H &gt;, 03 

bo V -S^S 



i8oa 




S .^ U) 






£ ~ 



i E 



■Gulf 
ateau 
River 


£^ 






S^S 


H pq 


^1 

.2 ^ 

O 73 

' — ' 03 




■£ O Oh 


pi River and the 
Appalachian PI 
The Kanawha 


S c 




ns near the nor 
s northward thi 
Ohio River at 


ississip 
of the 
Ohio. 


.S 2 
&gt; 


a c 


.0 


r begii 
t flow 
m the 




^ OJ 


-a &gt;, 


IS 
O 


&gt;".£ 


te to the 
najor riv 
ard into 


Oj „ 
bo S 


SO 

.&gt; &gt;^ 
•- -a 


Oj 

O 
C 


aheia R 
Virginic 
id helps 


3 ' &gt; 


ra "^ 


OJ c/^ 




hn „ H 


s a ro 
.The 

west\ 


&gt;" C 
"2 "^ 




&gt; 

o 


ononi 
VVesi 
nia a 


aj O -C 


IS TCi 


nj u 


o 


:; M 
r of 
;vlva 


■a y S 


O-g 


X! 


"S 


It pro 
of Me 
flow n 


is the 
Kana 
Gaule 
state. 


S2 

OJ 

&gt; 


Th( 
horde 
Penns 



jC -s 



^H 



-a bo . 

c c : 



fi&gt; 



■« tS i 1 

c ^ H 

&lt;« S V 

■■^■2 "= 

O 4-." 

o c3 S 

^ bo u 

«] H &gt;. 

f-H cd u 

■ -X S^ 

be'-' .5 

i2 CJ cd 

X -S -5 



.£ ^ 



■^ .3 



°pi-s ys 



■^ -"=■ 5 1X2 
■^ — ._! M-. 



&amp;-S 



■S &gt;s 3.^; 



m " O 

■S ^ c 

OJ TO 

ra nj '^ 








c 


rt 


u 


X 


Oj 


.3 


X 


|c 


^ 


'So 


fl 


^ 


x 











'"■ .- J^ ^ r u ii 
„ ^ t^ C S M c 

fc|s ^ s a I 

3 5 -2 2 " G 

" ^ SS^ S ti S 
S-S §^ ^1 S 

? « G o -g D. ti 
" ^ (u B, «J 2 2 

CO c J- bo j^ oj c 

'&amp; si S £ -i 'S 2 

._H ^ ro t- c^ -t-- 

'^^ "H jH 3 -^ G C 

•^ ^ -b ^ c: c c 
5 rt ;: :=3 o 

^ 2 ^ g- ^ .S -S 
8 5 § -S S -S 



■a 
a 

3 C 

o ■- 

a; u 






M - 1 

&lt;« g - - O , 

c 

=« "'" o'.S s 

On! . -g -C ■ 

-^Q g g 
. ■ ° ^ 

ss's.s „ 

4j 3 „ U 

143 I — 1 CO S 



V.S 
■5 S 



WEST VIRGINIA 



Economy 



The economy of West Virginia is heavily influenced 
by the nature of the land, especially the hilliness. A 
plentiful supply of cheap fuel, water, and raw materials 
near great population centers favors manufacturing. 
BiU manufacturing is generally limited to valley areas 
with fairly level land and available transjjortation. 
Farming is also limited to these areas, or to patches of 
level or gendy sloping ground in the hills. Mining and 
forestry are the chief economic activities in the upland 
and movmtainous areas that cover much of the state. 

Natural Resources. Few areas of similar size have 
so great a variety of resources as West Virginia. These 
resources include mineral deposits, many kinds of tim- 
ber, scenic recreational areas, and abundant rainfall. 

Minerals are West N'irginia's most valuable natural 
resources. Deposits of bituminous (soft) coal lie under 
about two-thirds of the state. The coal deposits are in a 
broad belt that covers all the central counties and 
almost all the western counties. Fields of natural gas, 
pools of petroleum, and petroleum-bearing sands are 
found in the western half of the state. Brine and rock 
salt come from the Ohio and Kanawha river valleys. 
Limestone is found in the mountains along the eastern 
border. Sand used in glassmaking comes from several 
north&lt;entral counties and from Morgan County in the 
Eastern Panhandle. Other West Virginia minerals in- 
clude clay, sandstone, and shale. 

Forests cover nearly 1 0,000,000 acres of West Vu'ginia. 
Most of the virgin forests have been cut. But second- 
growth woodlands, many of them on farms, provide 
large quantities of commercial timber. The most im- 
portant trees are such hardwoods as cherry, poplar, and 
oak. Evergreen trees, including hemlock, red spruce, 
and white pine, grow on mountain ridges and plateaus, 
and in river gorges. 

More than enough new timber grows each year to 
replace the timber that is cut. State nurseries provide 
seedlings for reforestation. 

Plants and Animals. The river valleys of West Virginia 
bloom with wild flowers from early spring to late fall. 
Bloodroot and hepaticas blossom beneath dogsvood, 
redbud, white-blossomed hawthorn, and wild crab- 
apple trees. Azaleas and rhododendrons bloom in late 
spring and early summer. In autumn, the fields glow 
with asters, black-eyed Susans, and goldenrod. 

White-tailed deer and black bears live in the moun- 
tains. Small woodland animals include gray and red 
foxes, minks, opossums, and raccoons. Many kinds of 
fish, including bass, trout, and walleyed pike, are found 
in the rivers and streams. 

Soils. The blackest, most fertile soils are in the river 
valleys. Some of die sandy soils that cover the rest of the 
state contain natural lime that makes the land espe- 
cially good for grain crops and fruit trees. 

Manufacturing employs more West Virginia workers 
than any other activity. It accounts for almost two- 
thirds of the value of goods produced in the state. Prod- 
ucts manufactured in West Virginia have a value added 
by manufacture of £1,626,000,000 a year. This figure 
represents the value added to products by West Vir- 
ginia industries, not counting such costs as materials, 
supplies, and fuels. 

i8od 



PRODUCTION rN WEST VIRGINIA 

Totol yearly value of goods produced — $2,483,166,000 



MINERAL 

PRODUCTS 29% 



MANUFACTURED 
PRODUCTS 65% 



^ 



AGRICULTURAL 
PRODUCTS 6% 



Manufaclurinc percent a(-i» based on value added by manufacture. 
Other purctnlanos based on value of produciion. 



Source: Latest available U.S. Government statistics 






EMPLOYMENT IN WEST VIRGINIA 

Average yearly number of persons employed — 515,4 


00 


Number of 
Employees 


Manufacturing 


U M * 


1 23,800 


Wholesale &amp; Retail Trade 


* U H 




80,400 


GovernmenI 


M U 




68,200 


Agriculture 


U H 




64,000 


Services 


* * * 




53,800 


Mining 


* » J 




45,900 


Transportation &amp; Public Utilities 


* * i 




41,500 


Construction 


* J 




20,000 


Finance, Insurance &amp; Real Estate 






1 3,500 


Forestry 






4,500 



Source: Employment statistics supplied by employers to government 

agencit'S 

Chemical Industry is West Virginia's most important 
manufacturing industry. It earns a greater income than 
any other industiy in the state. Chemical products made 
in West Virginia have a value added of about 5688,361,- 
000 yearly. The chemical industry operates chiefly in 
the Kanawha and Ohio river valleys. It uses coal, natu- 
ral gas, oil, and salt found in the region. Factories in 
Charleston, Himtington, Parkersburg, and Wheeling 
make dyes, detergents, paints, plastics, synthetic rub- 
ber, and salt cake (sodium sulfate). 

Iron and Steel Industry adds about $360,060,000 a year 
to the value of West Virginia products. It centers in the 
Northern Panhandle. Huge furnaces and mills line the 
banks of the Ohio River near Wheeling and Weirton. 
Almost all the iron ore comes from mines in Minnesota 
and Michigan. Freighters bring the ore to ports along 
Lake Erie. From there, trains cany it to West Virginia. 
Weirton produces galvanized sheet steel, gray iron, and 
structural steel. A huge tin-plating plant also operates 
in the city. Huntington has a large nickel plant. Ravens- 
wood produces aluminum. 

Stone, Clay, and Glass Products made in West Virginia 
have a value added of about §209,138,000 a year. The 
state is famous for its glassware and pottery. Leading 
glass-producing communities include Charleston, Fair- 
mont, and Huntington. Clarksburg and St. Marys 
manufacture millions of glass marbles every year. Table 



FARM, MINERAL, AND FOREST PRODUCTS 



This map shows the areas where the state's 
W leading farm, mineral, and forest products ore 

'-°°' produced. The major urban areas (shown in red) 

^ are the state's important manufacturing centers. 

Grapet 



Huntington £.»;^ ^ 

■^^^ Vegetables 
Tobacco ^ 



O 

Sand 
and 



feJV^ 



Sail 

Cloy Q Nolural ^ Buckwheat Sand j" Berries 

• • Gas Oots , and A 

Cool D„i^ products Vegetables'P' A Corn A Q 

^ SL fruit Fruit S'&lt;"' 

Natural ^■H ^ T-J ^ ^^ 



^ 



Wf A Dairy 
Beef IV? Products 
CaHle JL 

V Natural 
Gas 
Poultry 

Cool _ Doi'V 

Vege 



Dairy „ W 

Product, j^"" pi,, 

Beef Cattle 



Stone 



Poultry 



^ 



o 

Pototoes 



V 

Poultry 



Hogs 



Oil y», 



Noturol 
Gas 



Cool 



Q 

Cool 



Cool 
Sheep 



Forest ^ ^ 

Products y-y 
Sheep 



Q 



_, Forest 

Charleston Products 

Vegetobiesiy A 

n-p-v ^ 

W ,". Corn A, ^n 

Cool . Cool ft- ^ 

(j, Corn Dairy Products 

Notooi Q nri'' ^ 

Gos rVil rT Poultry 

C°°' Beef Conle 

3 Cool 



Q 



Grapes 



25 



50 





I 1 &gt;— I r^- r- 

26 60 75 100 

WORLD BOOK map 



75 Miles 
I 

Kilometers 



Huge Chemical Plants, such as this one in South Charleston, 
operate throughout the Kanawha and Ohio river valleys. The 
production of chemicals is West Virginia's most important industry. 



Alpha Photo Associates 



|-^,',-g|^-.i,l,i»j|.S.. 



rai' 



!lttl! 



'I"i 



rr**«*hiB&gt;^ 



I 



\.&gt; 



W^i 






WEST VIRGINIA 



glassware comes from Morgantown, Moundsville, 
Weston, and Williamstown. Other glass products in- 
clude blown glass, bottles, crystalware, plate glass, 
stained glass, and structural glass, such as glass bricks. 

Most of the potteiy plants are in Hancock County, 
although a few operate elsewhere along the Ohio River. 
They produce such products as chinaware, firebrick, 
paving brick, porcelain, and tile. 

Metal Products. Charleston has one of the largest 
hand-tools plants in the world. It also has factories 
that produce mining and farming equipment. A South 
Charleston plant makes army vehicles. Plants in VVeir- 
ton make railroad spikes. A mower and farm equipment 
plant operates at Dunbar. Parkersburg has factories that 
produce oil-well machiner\'. Railroad-car and foundry 
works are centered around Himtington. Clarksburg and 
Huntington produce electrical equipment. 

Textile Plants operate in many commimities. Mills 
at Berkeley Springs, Mardnsburg, and White Sulphur 
Springs manufacture hosier)'. A sweater-knitting mill is 
in Spencer. Factories in Huntington, Morgantown, 
and Wheeling make tents and work clothes. Clarks- 
burg, Grafton, and Princeton produce ladies' apparel. 
Much rayon yarn comes from Nitro and Parkersburg. 
Raw nylon produced in Belle is shipped to spinning 
mills in New Jersey to be made into textiles. 

Mining. W'est \'irginia ranks high among the states 
in the value of mineral production. Mining accounts 
for over a fourth of the value of goods produced in 
West \'irginia, or about $714,964,000 a year. Bitumi- 
nous coal is the most important mining product. 

Coal. West \'irginia has led the nation in the pro- 
ducUon of bituminous coal since 1931. Production 
averages more than 1 1 8,499,000 tons a year. Logan and 
McDowell counties rank highest in coal production. 

Pocahontas coal from West Virginia is popular be- 
cause it burns with litUe smoke. It also has excellent 
heating and steam-producing qualities. This coal is rich 
in such by-products as coal tar, creosote, and pitch. 

Natural Gas and Petroleum. Gas fields lie nearly every- 
where under the Appalacliian Plateau. Gas production 
in West Virginia totals about 210,698,000,000 cubic 
feet yearly. Many of the gas fields also produce natu- 
ral gasoline (natural gas in liquid form). Output of this 
fuel totals more than 32,921,000 gallons a year. West 
Virginia also produces about 3,000,000 barrels of pe- 
troleum annually. Empty reservoirs from which natural 
gas has been taken serve as storage places for gas from 
Texas and Louisiana. Pipelines carry the gas to West 
Virginia, where it is stored for use in northeastern states. 

Stone. West Virginia produces more than 7,250,000 
tons of limestone and sandstone a year. Manufacturers 
use limestone to make agricultural lime, cement, and 
flux for steel mills. Glass manufacturers grind sand- 
stone into fine sand for use in high-quality glass. Jeffer- 
son and Berkeley counties produce dolomite, a stone 
used in building highways and railway roadbeds. 

Sand, Gravel, and Clay. Dredges scoop more than 
4,000,000 tons of sand and gravel a year from the beds 
of West \'ii'ginia's rivers. Construction companies use 
most of this material. A mountain near Berkeley Springs 
contains sand that is 98 per cent pure silica and excel- 




Uov.-iiuy. Publix 

Coal Mining is one of West Virginia's ctiief industries. In tliese 
tall buildings, called tipples, \he coal is washed, rock pieces are 
removed, and screens sort the pieces of coal by size. 

lent for making glass. Miners remove about 500,000 
tons of potters' clay and fire clay each year from pits 
in the Northern Panhandle and the Ohio \'alley. 

Salt. The state produces about a million tons of salt 
a year. In 1 943, chemical companies began to develop 
a huge bed of pure rock salt in the upper Ohio Val- 
ley. This deposit has an area of about 1,600 square 
miles and is about 110 feet thick. It lies more than a 
mile below the surface of the earth. The salt is removed 
by forcing boiling water into the bed to dissolve the 
salt, and then pumping out the brine. 

Agriculture accounts for about 6 per cent of the value 
of goods produced in West Virginia, or about S142,- 
700,000 a year. West Virginia has more than 44,000 
farms. They average 138 acres in size. 

Livestock and dairy products provide the greatest 
source of farm income. Many West Virginia fanners 
have prize herds of purebred beef cattle, including An- 
gus and Herefords. Many farmers also raise sheep and 
hogs. Because the winters are fairly mUd, stock can 
usually graze all year. 

W'est \'irginia fruit growers raise laige crops of apples 
and peaches. They also grow cherries, grapes, pears, 
and plums. Orchard crops come mainly from the East- 
ern Panhandle. Faimers in all parts of the state raise 
blackberries and raspberries. 

The easternmost part of West Virginia lies in the 
Shenandoah Valley, one of the best apple-growing re- 
gions in the United States. Fanners in West Vuginia 
were the first to grow Grimes Golden and Golden Deli- 
cious apples. Apple growers from West Virginia, Vir- 
ginia, Maiyland, and Pennsylvania maintain a mar- 
keting organization at Martinsburg, where large plants 
produce canned apples and cider. 

Corn has been VVest Vii-ginia's most important field 



i8of 





Glassmaking uses two of West Virginia's 
natural resources, silica-rich sand and natural 
gas. This craftsman etches a drinking glass. 



Phut. IS by West Virginia Dept. ui CuinniL-rce 

Learning New Skills, workers attend a training class in glass blowing. 
These men are unable to find work in their own trades. Classes to retrain unem- 
ployed men and women are held in all sections of West Virginia, 



crop since pioneer days. The largest harvests come from 
level valley lands near the Ohio and Potomac rivers. 
Other crops grown in these areas include barley, pota- 
toes, oats, and wheat. Buckwheat is raised in moun- 
tain areas where the growing season is short and the 
soil is poor. Farmers in many counties raise hay. Large 
crops of tobacco grow in the lower Ohio Valley. 

Electric Power. West Virginia's many rivers and 
streams could furnish a vast amount of water power. 
But only a few hydroelectric projects have been built 
to use this power. Most electric power comes from 
steam-generating plants. For West Virginia's kilowatt- 
hoiu' production, see Electric Power (table). 

Transportation. West Virginia's rugged land surface 
has made transportation difficult since pioneer days. 
Early setders used trails that followed the streams and 
rivers through the mountains. Later, steamboats car- 
ried goods and passengers on the larger rivers. During 
the 1800"s, the state began to improve its waterways 
and built new highways and railroads. But many back- 
woods areas remained isolated until their first paved 
roads were built in the early 1 900's. 

West Virginia has about 36,000 miles of roads and 
highways, more than half of which are paved. The 
West \'irginia Turnpike rtms 88 miles between Charles- 
ton and Princeton. West Virginia has perhaps had 
more road-building problems than any other state east 
of the Rocky Mountains. Construction crews must cut 
across rugged mountains and must also bridge hun- 
dreds of streams. 

Railroads operate on about 3,700 miles of track in 
West Virginia. The first railroad, the Baltimore cS: 
Ohio, reached the state at Harpers Ferry in 1835. It 
began construction westward from Harpers Ferry in 
1838. By 1852, this line had reached Wheeling, by way 



of Cumberland, Md. Construction crev\s had to build 
1 1 tunnels and 1 1 3 bridges between Cumberland and 
Wheeling, a distance of only about 200 miles. Rail 
transportation allowed West Virginia to develop its 
mineral and forest resources. 

West Virginia has about 400 miles of navigable 
watenvays. Ships and barges on the Ohio, Monon- 
gahela, and Kanawha rivers cany over 124,000,000 
tons of goods a year. These goods include chemicals, 
coal, Itnnber, oil, sand, steel, and other bulky products. 

During the I930's, the federal government built a 
series of locks and dams on the Ohio River and its 
branches. These improved the rivers of West Virginia 
for barge traffic. The LT.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
has continued to develop the state's waterways. 

•Aviation developed slowly because it is difficult to 
build runways on the state's rolling surface. West Vir- 
ginia now has more than 50 airports. About six major 
airlines serve the state. Charleston is the chief center of 
West Virginia's network of scheduled air roiues. 

Communication. The state's first newspaper, the 
Potomak Guardian and Berkeley Advertiser, appeared in 
Shepherdstown in 1 790. The state now has more than 
1 1 5 newspapers, about 30 of which are dailies. The 
Wheeling Intelligencer, founded in 1852, is still being pub- 
lished. Other early papers in circulation today are the 
]t'est Virginian, published in Fairmont, and the Daily 
Herald of Wellsburg. Other dailies include the Bluefield 
Telegraph, the Charleston Gazette, the Charleston Daily 
Mail, the Huntington Advertiser, the Huntington Herald- 
Dispatih, and the 1 1 heeling .\ews-Register. 

The state's first radio station, WSAZ, began broad- 
casting from Huntington in 1923. WSAZ-TV, the first 
television station, started operations in Huntington in 
1949. 

i8og 



WEST VIRGINIA 



History 



Indian Days. The earliest Indians of the region were 
Mound Builders (see Mound Builders). Hundreds of 
their burial mounds may still be seen in the Ohio and 
Kanawha river valleys. These Indians had disappeared 
long before the first white men arrived in the 1670"s. 

White explorers found several Indian tribes using the 
region as hunting grounds. These dibes included the 
Cherokee, Conoy, Delaware, Shawnee, and Susque- 
hanna. None of them claimed the rugged area as a 
permanent home. The Indians hunted game and gath- 
ered salt from pools of brine during the summer. They 
moved back to their homes in the east and north as 
winter approached. They often fought wars for control 
of the hunting grounds and brine pools. See Indian, 
American (table, Indian Tribes). 

Exploration. The area that became West Virginia 
formed part of the Virginia Colony. King James I 
granted the colony to the London Company, a group of 
British merchants and investors, in 1606. The bounda- 
ries reached from present-day South Carolina north to 
Pennsylvania, and extended westward and northwest- 
ward indefinitely. The German explorer John Lederer 
and his companions were probably the first white men 
to see the region that became West Virginia. Lederer's 
expedition reached the crest of the Blue Ridge, probably 
in 1669. In 1671, Thomas Batts and Robert Fallam led 
another expedition into the region in search of fur- 
hunting areas and transportation routes. Other explor- 
ing parties visited the region during the next few years. 

Early Settlement. The first settler in the region was 
Morgan Morgan of Delaware, who built a cabin at 
Bunker Hill, probably in 1 726. Germans seeking greater 
religious freedom came from Pennsylvania in 1727. 
They established a settlement called New Mecklenburg 
(now Shepherdstown). Other settlements were soon 
founded, many of them by Scotch-Irish from Northern 
Ireland. Most of these pioneer farmers settled in the 
Eastern Panhandle, in the Ohio Valley, and along the 
Greenbrier and New rivers. 

The Indians often attacked the settlers, who were 
taking over their hunting grounds. The pioneers built 
a number of forts and blockhouses, many of which 
formed the beginnings of towns and cities. They in- 
cluded Fort Henry (now Wheeling), Fort Lee (Charles- 
ton), and F'ort Randolph (Point Pleasant). George 
Washington led an unsuccessful raid against the French 
and Indians in 1754, during the French and Indian 
Wars (see French and Indian Wars). The French and 
Indians almost wiped out the forces of General Edward 
Braddock in 1 755. 

The explorers John P. .Salley and John Howard dis- 
covered coal on the Coal River in 1 742. But the de- 
posits were not developed until railroads began expand- 
ing in the mid-1 800's. The lumber industry began after 
1 755, when people started to use water-powered saw- 
mills to produce lumber. 

In 1763, King George III refused to let the colonists 
in America take any land west of the AUeghenies until 
treaties could be made with the Indians for peaceful 
settlement. The Scotch-Irish ignored the order. The 
Ciermans and the Dutch paid no attention to the order 
because they could not even read it. 

]8oh 



HISTORIC 
WEST VIRGINIA 







iliBlKllllltlliiiiliiii 







■^^-^tJ 



Point Pleasant 



Point Pleasont 





The First Natural-Gas Well 

the country was accidentally discov- 
ered by James Wilson while he was 
water-drilling at Charleston in 1815. 



Coal Was Discovered near 

Racine by John Peter Salley in 

742. West Virginia ranks as 

the leading coal-producing state. 



^1 



Settlers pushed over the mountains into the forbidden 
green valleys in greater and greater numbers. They 
notched trees with their axes to mark their land claims. 
By treaties signed in 1 7(38, the Cherokee and Iroquois 
gave up all claim to the lands they had used as hunting 
grounds between the Allegheny Mountains and the 
Ohio River. By I 775, about 30,000 settlers lived there. 

Demands for Separation. The Allegheny Moimtains 
separated Virginia's western settlers from the seat of 
government at Williamsburg in the east. People in the 
west developed a social and economic life quite differ- 
ent from that of the eastern settlements. Plantation 
owners in the east specialized in tobacco and trade. 
Western farmers relied on livestock and food crops. 
Fewer persons lived in the west, and they led more 
solitary lives than did the aristocratic easterners. 

Settlers in the west began to demand their own gov- 
ernment as early as 1776, when they sent petitions to 
the Continental Congress. The Revolutionary War 



Fort Henry 



Wheeling 






i\uyiiiiijii)iHi 



During the Civil War, Confederate 
troops often raided West Virginia from 
positions in the Shenandoah Volley. The 
town of Romney changed hands 56 times. 



Berkeley Springs was George *^ 
Washington's favorite health re- -^ 
sort. Lord Fairfax gave these min- 
eral springs to the state in 1756. 

Berkeley Springs 



-~-^; 




Romney • 



Ice Mountoin 



Holltown 
Uvilla • • Horpers Ferry 

Charles Town 



He Battle of Point Pleasant in 1774 is coiled "the first battle 
of the Revolutionary War" by some historians. Settlers defeated Indians 
to gain control of the Northwest Territory. In the Revolutionary War's 
"final" battle in 1 782, Indians and British attacked Ft. Henry at Wheeling. 



CHARLESTON 

• 

Racine 



Ice Mountain has ice at its 

base even on hot summer days. 
Cold airsweeping through under- 
ground passages forms the ice. 





John Brown 

eral arsenal 
in 1859 was 
tempt to cause 



's Raid on the f' 

at Harpers Fe 
on unsuccessful 
a Negro rebell 



ed- 
rry 
ot- 
lon. 



George Washington surveyed 
land along the south branch of the 
Potomoc River in 1747 and 1748. 




The First Rural Free Delivery be- V ' 

gon in 1 896 on mail routes from Charles \\ 
Town, Holltown, and Uvilla, W 




IMPORTANT DATES IN WEST VIRGINIA 



1669? John lederer and his companions became the first white 
men to see the West Virginia region. 

1726? Morgan Morgan, the state's first settler, built a cabin at 
Bunker Hill in Berkeley County. 

1727 Germans from Pennsylvania established a settlement at 
New Mecklenburg (now Shepherdstown). 

1742 John P. Salley discovered coal on the Coai River. 

1754-1755 The French and Indians defeated troops led by 
George Washington and General Edward Braddock. 

1776 People in western Virginia sent petitions to the Conti- 
nental Congress asking for a separate government. 

1815 Gas was discovered near Charleston. 

1835 The first railroad reached the state at Harpers Ferry. 

1859 John Brown and his followers raided the federal arsenal 
at Harpers Ferry. 

1861 The counties of western Virginia refused to secede with 
Virginia. These counties organized a separate govern- 
ment that supported the Union. 

1863 West Virginia became the 35th state on June 20. 



1872 The people ratified the present state constitution. 

1915 The Supreme Court of the United States ruled that West 

Virginia owed Virginia $12,393,929.50 as part of the 

state debt at the time of separation. 

1920-1921 Miners fought with mine guards, police, and fed- 
eral troops in a dispute over organizing unions. 

1931 West Virginia became the leading state in mining 

bituminous coal. 
1939 West Virginia made the final payment of its debt to 

Virginia. 
1943 Geologists found vast salt deposits in the northwestern 

counties. 
1946 Maior chemical industries began operating in the Ohio 

River Valley. 
1959 The National Radio Astronomy Observatory began 

operating at Green Bank. 
1963 West Virginia held a yea-'-Iong statehood centennial 

celebration. 
1965 The state abolished capital punishment. 



i8i 



WEST VIRGINIA 



halted this attempt. The western settlers contributed 
their full share of men and supplies to the war. Indian 
armies led by British officers invaded the region three 
times between 1777 and 1782, but were driven out. 

Industries began to develop during the Revolu- 
tionary War. In 1 794, Peter Tarr built the first iron 
furnace west of the Alleghenies in the Northern Pan- 
handle. In 1808, the Kanawha Valley began producing 
large quantities of salt. 

Sectional Strife. During the early IBOO's, the differ- 
ences between eastern and western Virginia became 
even greater. Trade in the east moved to the Atlantic 
Ocean, while commerce in the west used waterways that 
flowed toward the Mississippi River. The landowning, 
slaveholding aristocracy of eastern \'irginia represented 
the larger part of the population. The easterners con- 
trolled state affairs. They opposed public improvements 
that the western farmers and industrialists wanted. 
Bitter disputes developed over slavery, ta.xation, use 
of public funds, education, and other issues. 

Further discoveries of mineral resources continued 
the economic development of the western section. Natu- 
ral gas was discovered in 1815 near Charleston. In 1841, 
William Tompkins, a salt-maker in the Kanawha Val- 
ley, first used natural gas as a fuel for manufacturing. 
An oil well drilled at Burning Springs in 1 860 began a 
stampede for oil. Burning Springs became a thriving 
village with hundreds of shacks and tents. 

Civil War and Statehood. Disputes over slavery 
reached a climax in 1859 when John Brown and his 
followers seized the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry (see 
Brown, John). Virginia had to choose sides when Con- 
federate troops in South Carolina fired on Fort Sumter 
on April 12, 1861. On April 17, a state convention 
voted for secession. But a majority of the people in 
the western counties supported the Union. These coun- 
ties declared their independence and formed a govern- 
ment they called the Restored Government of Virginia. 

In August, 1861, the western counties approved the 
formation of a new state named Kanawha. This Indian 
word is believed to mean place of the white stone , referring 
to the salt deposits in the region. The westerners pre- 
pared a state constitution in November, 1861. In it, 
they changed the name of the proposed state to West 
Virginia. The people adopted the constitution in April, 
1862. Congress admitted West Virginia to the Union 
on June 20, 1863, as the 35th state. At that time. West 
Virginia had a population of about 380,000, includ- 
ing about 15,000 slaves. Arthur I. Boreman became 
the first governor, and the state capital was established 
at Wheeling. 

The new state furnished abotu 30,000 men to the 
Union armies. More than 8,000 men joined the Con- 
federate armies. Batdes raged in many parts of West 
Virginia during the first year of the war. After a series of 
defeats in 1861, Confederate forces stopped trying to 
capture land west of the Alleghenies. But they often 
raided the state for food, for grain, and especially for 
salt, which was scarce in the South. Small Confederate 
detachments also invaded West Virginia in an unsuc- 
cessful attempt to destroy the Baltimore and Ohio Rail- 
road. Thisline connected the West and Washington,D.C. 



Virginia asked West Virginia to reunite with it after 
the war ended in 1 865, but West Virginia refused to do 
so. Virginia then insisted that West Virginia pay 
part of the state debt at the time of separation. Legal 
battles continued over this issue until 1915, when the 
Supreme Court of the United States ruled that West 
Virginia owed Virginia $12,393,929.50. West Virginia 
made its final payment on the debt in 1939. 

A West Virginia law denied voting rights to about 
15,000 men who had fought for the Confederacy or 
helped it in other ways. But the legislature repealed this 
law in 1871. A new constitution was adopted in 1872. 
The state capital was moved to Charleston in 1870. It 
was moved back to Wheeling in 1875, but was returned 
to Chadeston in 1885. 

The development of railroads speeded industrial ex- 
pansion during the years after the Civil War. Railroads 
and branch lines built during the late 1 800's opened up 
valuable mineral and timber resources in the interior 
of the state. Coal production increased greatly to meet 
the needs of the railroads and new industries. 

Experiments conducted in Pennsylvania in 1874 
showed that natural gas could be used to produce in- 
dustrial power on a large scale. Many industries came to 
West Virginia in the late 1800's to take advantage of 
this fuel. The lumber industry grew rapidly after 1881, 
when steam power replaced water power for sawmills. 

Labor Troubles. Between 1860 and 1920, West Vir- 
ginia mining companies hired great numbers of immi- 
grants. Wages were low and working conditions were 
poor. As early as 1863, coal miners tried to organize 
imions so they could make strong demands for better 
working conditions. The mining companies defeated 
most of these attempts by firing workers who caused 
trouble. A few unions were organized during the 1870's, 
but working conditions improved only slightly. A single 
mine explosion in 1907 killed 361 miners. 

The United Mine Workers of America began to or- 
ganize workers in West \'irginia in 1890. Miners at 





inc \3\jv^K.n\jn.3 \j 


r VVC3I viiwi 
Parly 


Term 


1. 


Arthur 1. Boreman 


Republican 


1863-1869 


2. 


Daniel D. T. Farnsworth 


Republican 


1869 


3. 


William E. Stevenson 


Republican 


1869-1871 


4. 


John J. Jacob 


Democratic 


1871-1877 


5. 


Henry M. Mathews 


Democratic 


1877-1881 


6. 


Jacob B. Jackson 


Democratic 


1881-1885 


7. 


Emanuel W. Wilson 


Democratic 


1885-1890 


8. 


Aretas B. Fleming 


Democratic 


1890-1893 


9. 


William A. MacCorkle 


Democratic 


1893-1897 


10. 


George W. Atkinson 


Republican 


1897-1901 


11. 


Albert B. White 


Republican 


1901-1905 


12. 


William M. O. Dawson 


Republican 


1905-1909 


13. 


William E. Glasscock 


Republican 


1909-1913 


14. 


Henry D. Hatfield 


Republican 


1913-1917 


15. 


John J. Cornwell 


Democratic 


1917-1921 


16. 


Ephraim F. Morgan 


Republican 


1921-1925 


17. 


Howard M. Gore 


Republican 


1925-1929 


18. 


William G. Conley 


Republican 


1929-1933 


19. 


Herman G. Kump 


Democratic 


1933-1937 


20. 


Homer A. Holt 


Democratic 


1937-1941 


21. 


Matthew M. Neely 


Democratic 


1941-1945 


22. 


Clarence W. Meadows 


Democratic 


1945-1949 


23. 


Okey L. Palteson 


Democratic 


1949-1953 


24. 


William C. Marland 


Democratic 


1953-1957 


25. 


Cecil H. Underwood 


Republican 


1957-1961 


26. 


William Wallace Barron 


Democratic 


1961-1965 


27. 


Hulelt C. Smith 


Democratic 


1965- 



182 



Paint Creek and at Cabin Creek went on strike in April, 
1912. Mineowners refused to talk with the workers. 
Twelve niiners were killed in batdes with mine guards. 
The miners killed four guards. Peace was restored only 
after Governor William E. Glasscock sent state militia 
to the area. In 1913, Governor Henry D. Hatfield pro- 
posed that the mining companies guarantee the miners 
a nine-hour workday and the right to organize. The 
miners and owners agreed to this plan, and the strike 
ended on April 28, 1913. 

Labor disputes quieted down after the United States 
entered World War I in 1917. The state provided raw 
materials and manufactured products for the war effort. 
Trouble in the coal fields flared up again after the war. 
In 1919, hundreds of union miners gathered near 
Charleston and prepared to march on Logan County 
to organize the miners there. Governor John J. Corn- 
well stopped die march by promising to investigate the 
union miners' complaints. 

In May, 1920, mineo\\Tiers at Matewan, in Mingo 
County, locked union miners out of their jobs. The firms 
hii-ed detecdves to put the miners out of their company- 
owned homes. Fighting broke out, and the miners and 
city police routed the company detectives. Miners and 
mine guards in Mingo County fought again in August. 
Governor Cornwell requested federal troops to stop the 
riot, and President Woodrow Wilson sent 500 soldiers. 
The union then threatened a state-wide sttike unless the 
soldiers were withdrawn. Cornwell gave Ln to the union, 
but fresh riots brought the ti-oops back and the governor 
declared martial law. 

The riots quieted during the winter, but broke out 
again early in 1921. Union miners marched on the city 
of Logan to organize the miners there. Mine guards met 
the miners with armed aii-planes and machine guns. 
A four-day battle followed near Blair. The arrival of 
federal troops and a squadron of bombers forced the 
miners to retreat. Later, the state indicted 543 miners 
for taking part in the march. Twent&gt;'-two of them were 
tried for neason against West Vhginia. A jury found 
them innocent. Many men left the union because of the 
miners' defeat. Almost 45,000 men were in the union in 
1920; by 1932 only about 100 members remained. 

After the National Recoveiy AdministraUon (NRA) 
was established in 1933, many mine workers rejoined 
the union. Under the terms of the NRA, the mining 
companies raised wages, shortened work hour's, and 
generally improved working conditions. 

During the 1920's and 1930's, the federal government 
built many locks and dams on the Ohio, Monongahela, 
and Kanawha rivers. These projects improved the rivers 
for barge traffic. In 1932, the state dedicated its present 
Capitol in Charleston. 

The 1940's and 1950's. World War II (1939T945) 
speeded indusuial development in West Virginia. The 
state's mines and factories furnished the armed forces 
with various war materials. The first large-scale syn- 
thetic-rubber plant in the United States began produc- 
tion near Charieston in 1943. Also in 1943, geologists 
found vast salt deposits in northwestern counties near 
the Ohio River. This discovery attracted chemical and 
synthetic textile companies to the region, because salt 
is a basic ingredient in many chemical products. 

During the war, the U.S. government established a 
military maneuver area Ln five of West Virginia's most 



WEST VIRGINIA 



rugged coundes. The army used the area as a training 
ground for infantry troops. 

Labor troubles in the coal mines arose again in the 
1940's. In 1946, after a series of work stoppages, the 
federal government took over hundreds of West \'ir- 
ginia mines. Government agents operated the mines for 
several mondis until an agreement was reached. 

The 1950's were years of adjustment for West \'ir- 
ginia's economy. Defense indusnies no longer needed 
so many of the state's products. The demand for coal 
fell as railroads shifted from coal-burning to diesel en- 
gines, and as more people began to use gas and oil as 
heating fuels. The coal industry used machines to do 
more and more jobs formerly performed by mine work- 
ers. Unemployment reached high levels, and many 
workers left the state in search of better job opportuni- 
ties. On the other hand, the chemical and synthetic 
textile industries, solidly based on coal, oil, salt, and 
water resources, continued to grow. Glass and metal 
production also increased. 

In 1959, the National Radio Astronomy Observatory 
began operating at Green Bank. That same year, the 
LTnion Carbide Chemical Corporation established a 
technical center at South Charleston. These develop- 
ments brought many highly educated workers and their 
families into the state. 

West Virginia Today. The continued growth of some 
manufacturing industries during the 1 960's offered hope 
of economic health for West Virginia. But many la- 
borers still could not find jobs, and many farmers still 
struggled to raise crops on poor land. People continued 
to leave the state Ln search of jobs Ln lai-ge northern and 
western cities. 

During the 1960 presidential campaign, John F. 
Kennedy called for more federal aid for West Virginia 
and other economically depressed areas. Under Presi- 
dents Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, the federal 
government increased its assistance to West Vhginia. 
The Area Redevelopment Administration (tVRA) of the 
Department of Commerce made loans to industries in 
the state. The ARA also provided funds for improving 
West Vii'ginia's resorts and recreational areas in order to 
attract tourists. 

West Virginia's 88-mile turnpike between Charleston 
and Princeton, which opened in 1954, became part of 
the federal interstate highway system in 1962. Several 
other parts of the interstate system were buUt across 
West Virginia in the 1960's. In 1964, West Virginia 
voters approved a bond issue for building state highways 
to connect with the interstate system. These roads were 
expected to aid West Virginia's economy by opening up 
new parts of the state to industry and tourism. 

In 1965, Congress approved a plan for aiding the 
economically troubled region known as Appalachia. The 
region covers parts of 1 1 Appalachian Mountain states. 
But \Vest \'irginia is the only state that lies entirely 
within Appalachia. The aid-to-Appalachia plan in- 
cludes provisions for building roads, developing water 
resources, improving pasture land, restoring timber- 
lands, and retraining workers. Also in 1965, West Vii"- 
ginia abolished capital punishment in the state. 

Harrv G. Hoffmann, James Gav Jones, and Richard S. Ltttle 



183 



WEST VIRGINIA 



Study Aids 



Related Articles in World Book include: 
Biographies 
Baker, Newton D. Latham, Jean L. 

Brown, John Morrow, Dwight W. 

Buck, Pearl S. Pierpont, Francis H. 

Cornstalk Reuther, Walter P. 

Davis, Henry G. Rowan, Andrew S. 

Davis, John W. Sinclair, Harry F. 

Holt, Rush D. Washington, George 

Jackson, "Stonewall" Wilson, William L. 

Kenna, John E. Yeager, Charles 

Cities and Towns 
Beckley Harpers Ferry Morgantown 

Bluefield Huntington Wheeling 

Charleston Martinsburg White Sulphur Springs 

Clarksburg 

Physical Features 
Allegheny Mountains Kanawha River 

Blue Ridge Mountains Monongahela River 

Harpers Ferry National Ohio River 

Monument Potomac River 

Products 
For West Virginia's rank among the states, see: 
Apple Coal Gas (fuel) Mining 

Other Related Articles 
Civil War Virginia (History) 

Southern States Water Wheel (picture) 

Outline 
I. Government 

A. Constitution D. Courts F. Taxation 

B. Executive E. Local G. Politics 

C. Legislature Government 
II. People 

III. Education 

.\. Schools B. Libraries C. Museums 

IV. A Visitor's Guide 

A. Places to Visit B. .Annual Events 

V. The Land 

.\. Land Regions B. Rivers and Lakes 

VI. Climate 
VII. Economy 

A. Natural Resources E. Electric Power 

B. Manufacturing F. Transportation 

C. Mining G. Communication 

D. Agriculture 
VIM. History 



Questions 

What were three reasons that led West Virginia to 
separate from Virginia? 

Where do West Virginia's iron and steel industries get 
their iron-ore supplies? 

What two well-known varieties of apples were first 
grown in West Virginia? 

How did the development of railroads affect West Vir- 
ginia's economy? 

Why did Governor John J. Cornwell call for federal 
troops in 1920? 

What is West Virginia's most valuable mineral re- 
source? 

Where are most West Virginia manufacturing indus- 
tries located? Why? 

Why did many workers move to West Virginia between 
1860 and 1920? Why did the state's population decrease 
between 1950 and 1960? 

What is West Virginia's most important field crop? 

What caused the rapid development of the chemical 
industry in West Virginia after World War H? 

Bool&lt;s for Young Readers 

Bailey, Bernadine F. Picture Book of West Virginia. Whit- 
man, 1956. 

Lenski, Lois. Coal Camp Girl. Lippincott, 1959. 

Skidmore, Hubert. River Rising.' Doubleday, 1939. The 
experiences of York .Allen as a teacher in a lumber- 
camp school in the hill country. Hill Doctor. 1940. York 
.Allen's career as a doctor in the inoimtains. 

Books for Older Readers 

Ambler, Charles H., and Summers, Festus P. West Vir- 
ginia, the .Mountain -State. 2nd ed. Prentice-Hall, 1958. 

CoNLEY, Philip M., ed. West Virginia Encyclopedia. West 
Virginia Publishing Co., 1929. 

Core, Earl. Plant Life of West Virginia. Scholars Library, 
New York City, 1960. 

D.-kvis, Claude J., and Others. West Virginia Stale and 
Local Government. West Virginia Univ., 1963. 

Moore, George E. ^-1 Banner in the Hills; West Virginia's 
Statehood. Appleton, 1963. 

Morgan, John G. West Virginia Governors. Newspaper 
."Agency Corp., Charleston, W.Va., 1960. 

MusicK, Ruth .Ann. Ballads, Folk Songs and Folk Tales from 
West Virginia. West Virginia LIniv. Library, 1960. 

Shetler, Charles W. Guide to the Study of West Virginia 
History. West Virginia Univ. Library, 1960. 

West Virginia: A Guide to the Mountain State. Rev. ptg. Ox- 
ford, 1946. 



WEST VIRGINIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. See 

Universities and Colleges (table). 

WEST VIRGINIA STATE COLLEGE. See Universities 
AND Colleges (table). 

WEST VIRGINIA UNIVERSITY is a state-controlled 
coeducational institution at Morgantown, W.Va. It 
has colleges of agriculture, forestry, and home econom- 
ics; arts and sciences; commerce; education; and law. 
There are also schools of dentistry, journalism, medi- 
cine, mines, music, phannacy, and physical education 
and athletics, a graduate school, three extension divi- 
sions, two research divisions, and two experiment sta- 
tions in agriculture and engineering. The university was 
founded in 1867. For enrollment, see L'np.'ersities and 
Colleges (table). 

WEST VIRGINIA WESLEYAN COLLEGE. See Univer- 
sities and Colleges (table). 

WESTCOTT, EDWARD NOYES (1846-1898), wrote 
David Harum, which was published shortly after his 



death. Westcott was born in Syracuse, N.Y., and 
became a banker and broker. He wrote David Harum 
while dying of tuberculosis. It was an immediate best 
seller. The actor William H. Crane dramatized it, and 
acted in the play. Will Rogers and Evelyn Venabie took 
roles in the motion picture made from the book. West- 

COtt also composed some songs. Edward Wagenknecht 

WESTERGAARD, HARALD MALCOLM (1888-1950), 
a distinguished .American civil engineer and mathe- 
matician, became noted for his applications of mathe- 
matical analysis in the solution of engineering problems. 
He developed methods for the design of dams and of 
pavements for roads, bridges, and airports. Westergaard 
was born in Copenhagen, Denmark, and came to the 
United .Slates in 1914. Robert vv. abbett 

WESTERLY WIND. See Prevailing Westerly. 

WESTERMARCK, EDWARD ALEXANDER (1862- 
1939). was a Finnish anthropologist. Before reaching the 
age of 30, he wrote and published his major work, 7 he 



184 



History of Human Marriage (1891). He served as a pro- 
fessor at the University of London from 1907 to 1930. 
During this period, Westennarck wrote works on mar- 
riage, the relativity of morals, and customs in Morocco. 
Westermarck was born in Helsinki, but lived in Eng- 
land much of his life. David B. Stout 
WESTERN AUSTRALIA is the largest state in the Com- 
monwealth of Australia. This vast region covers the 
western third of the continent. Perth is its capital. 

Location, Size, and Surface Features. The state 
covers 975,920 square miles in the western part of 
Australia. For location, see Australia (political map). 
Mountain ranges include the Hamersley Range in the 
northwest, the Darling Range along the southwestern 
coast, and the Stirling Range farther south. The Ash- 
burton, Fitzroy, Gascoyne, and Murchison rivers flow 
across the western part of the state. 

Much of the inland area is a sandy wasteland. The 
Great Sandy Desert lies in the north, and the Great 
Mctoria Desert stretches across the southern border 
from South .Australia (see Australian Desert). The 
Gibson Desert lies between these two deserts. The 
central part of the state is a plain more than 1 ,000 feet 
abo\-e sea level. 

Natural Resources. Gold is the most important min- 
eral in the state. The chief gold fields lie in the Kal- 
gooriie district, 365 miles east of Perth. Other minerals 
include arsenic, asbestos, coal, iron ore, petroleum, 
silver, and tin. The state's most fertile regions are in the 
southwest near Perth. Great forests of eucalyptus, or 
gum, trees also grow in the southwest. 

Climate. Temperatures in central Western Australia 
range between 80 and 90°F. injanuary and about 60°F. 
in July. January temperatures north of the central area 
average 80 to 90°F.,andJuly temperatures range around 
70°F. Average temperatures in the south var\- from 70 to 
80°F. injanuary to 60°F. in July. Less than 10 inches of 
rain falls annually in the central area. From 1 to 20 inches 
falls north and south of the central region. Between 20 
and 40 inches falls in most of the coastal areas. 

The People and Their Work. Western Australia has 
800,038 people. More than half live in the Perth area, and 
most of the others work in the gold fields, timberlands, 
or farmlands of the southwest. The chief crops include 
barley, hay, oats, potatoes, and wheat. Other occupa- 
tions include bee farming, dairying, poultry and stock 
raising, and pearl fishing. Perth is the only city, and 
Kalgoorlie is the chief town in Western Australia. See 
Kalgoorlie: Perth. 

Transportation. Rail and air lines link the state with 
the rest of the country. The state government owns 
more than 4,500 miles of railroads. One of the longest 
stretches of railroad track in the world, without branches 
or rail connections, extends for about 1 ,000 miles from 
Kalgoorlie to Port .\ugusta in South Australia. There 
are also about 93,000 miles of roads. 

Education. All children must attend school until they 
reach the age of 14. The University of \V'estern Aus- 
tralia is near Perth. 

Government. The British Crown appoints a governor 
for the state. A premier heads the government, assisted 
by a cabinet of ministers. The 50 metribers of the legis- 
lative assembly, elected by popular vote, serve three 
years. The 30 members of the legislative council, elected 
by homeowners or occupants, serve six-year terms. 



WESTERN EUROPEAN UNION 

History. Dirck Hartog, a Dutch explorer, first sighted 
the coast of Western Australia in 1616. .^ militaiy set- 
tlement was made at King George Sound in 1826. But 
full colonization did not begin until 1829, when Cap- 
tain James Stirling founded the Swan River settlement 
and the towns of Perth and Fremantle. In 1901, West- 
ern Australia became one of the sbi original states of 
the Australian Commonwealth. c. M. H. Cl.\rk 

WESTERN CAROLINA COLLEGE. See Universities 
and Colleges (table). 

WESTERN CHURCH was a name given to the Roman 
Catholic Church after the Great Schism of the 800's. 
The name distinguishes die Roinan Catholic Church 
from the Eastern Orthodox Church, which does not 
recognize the pope as the head of the Christian Church. 
See also Roman Catholic Church. 

WESTERN COLLEGE FOR WOMEN. See Universi- 
ties AND Colleges (table). 

WESTERN ELECTRIC COMPANY is the world's largest 
manufacturer of communications equipment. The com- 
pany is owned by the Bell Telephone System. Most of 
its manufactured products are used by the Bell system. 
Western Electric also produces missile guidance systems, 
radar units, and other electronic equipment for the 
United States government. Through its subsidiary. 
Teletype Corporation, the company manufactures tele- 
typewriter equipment. Western Electric maintains 
major equipment manufacturing plants in several cities, 
including AUentown, Pa.; Baltimore; Chicago; Colum- 
bus, Ohio; Indianapolis; Kearny, N.J.; North .^ndover, 
Mass.; Oklahoma City; and Omaha. For sales, assets, 
and number of employees, see Manufacturing (table, 
100 Leading U.S. Manufacturers). 

Three men founded die Western Electric Manufac- 
turing Company in 1869. They were Elisha Gray, an 
inventor; Enos Barton, a former Western Union teleg- 
rapher; and Anson Stager, vice-president of the 
Western Union Telegraph Company. After the inven- 
don of the telephone in 1876, the company bega i to 
manufacture telephones. The Bell Company acquired 
control of Western Electric in 1882, in order to have a 
reliable source of uniform equipment. The new com- 
pany expanded its operations, and became known as 
Western Electric Company. In 1925, the Western Elec- 
tric Research Force was incorporated into a single re- 
search organization called Bell Telephone Laboratories. 
This is owned joindy by Western Electric and the 
American Telephone and Telegraph Company, the 
parent organization of the Bell Telephone System (see 
American Telephone and Telegraph Company). 
In \Vorld War II, Western Electric led the nation in 
making electronic equipment. Its headquarters are at 
195 Broadway, New York, N.V. 10007. david f. Robinson 
WESTERN EUROPEAN UNION (WEU) is a defense 
alliance to which Great Britain, France, Italy, Belgium, 
The Netherlands, Luxembourg, and West Germany 
belong. Agreements signed in October, 1954, formed 
WEU, and it was formally organized in May, 1955. All 
countries in the union are also members of N.\TO. The 
members of WEU discuss and act upon problems of 
control and production of armaments and on cultural 
and economic matters. See also North Atlantic 

Treaty Organization (NATO). Charles p. Schleicher 

185 




STERN FRONTIER LIFE 



Famous Names of the West Included John Stet- 
son, maker of wide-brimmed hats, and Sam Colt, 
whose pistol was "the gun that won the West." 




€olt.;[ltait;[[riiii&amp;illhto 

beware: of counterfeits « patent iNFRthiGEMENTS 




A Western Saddle had a 

curved fiorn in front, which 
held the cowboy's lariat. 




^■lC.s Pali'nl Firi&gt; Arms M.muf 




Barbed Wire provided farmers 
with cheap fencing, and helped 
put an end to the open range. 



WESTERN FRONTIER LIFE marks one of the most 
exciting chapters in American history. The settlement 
of the West represented the dreams of gold-hungry pros- 
pectors, and of homesteaders whose back-breaking 
labor transformed barren plains into fields of grain. It is 
the story of cowboys and the open range. It is the drama 
of Indians and outlaws, of the trains and stagecoaches 
they attacked, and of the citizens who brought order to 
the frontier. It is a living tradition that symbolizes to 
men and women everywhere the American achievement 
of taming a wild and beautiful land. 

The far western frontier appeared about 1850, and 
vanished about 1890. Adventurous settlers had crossed 
the Appalachian Mountains during the 1700's and 
pushed through the Cumberland Gap in the 1770's. 
They built homes along the Mississippi River a few 

186 



years later. Traders and scouts reached the Pacific 
Coast in the early iSoo's. But the area west of the 
Mississippi — "the last frontier" — did not attract many 
settlers until after 1850. The final period of western 
settlement lasted from 1850 to 1890. For the complete 
story of western expansion in the United States, see 
Westward Movement. 

The western frontier produced man\' colorful figures. 
Some, such as Jesse James and Billy the Kid, symbolize 
outlaws who "died with their boots on." Others, such 
as Wyatt Earp and "Wild Bill" Hickok, gained fame as 
fearless defenders of law and order. "Buffalo Bill" Cody 
— scout, Indian fighter, and showman — probably did 
more than anyone else to create interest in tlie old 
West. Other men, though less well-known, did more to 
develop the area itself. Charles Goodnight, a fiery 



rancher and cattle breeder, helped bring order to the 
Texas range. Granville Stuart of Montana, who had 
been an illiterate prospector, became United States 
minister to Paraguay and Umguay. Adolph Sutro, a 
German immigrant, built a vast tunnel through Ne- 
vada's Comstock Lode, and later served as mayor of 
San Francisco. 

The West promised to satisfy the needs and dreams 
of thousands of Americans who sought new homes, 
wealth, or perhaps only adventure. Some found happi- 
ness in green valleys or among tall mountains. Others 
died horrible deaths, riddled by bullets or scalped by 
Indians. Ambition, energy, and sometimes greed lay 
behind the development of the western frontier. The 
westward rush brought great personal achievements, but 
it also produced crime and violence. Life on the western 
frontier seems colorful when we look back on it today. 
But the people who settled there foimd it difficult and 
dangerous — and even dull at times. 

Building the Frontier 

For many years, the land on the western side of the 
Mississippi River formed the frontier of American settle- 
ment. Only a few thousand settlers had moved to Texas 
and California in the early i8oo's. Land was still plenti- 
ful in the East, and treaties with the Indians forbade 
white settlements in many areas of the West. But, after 
1850, many causes led to westward expansion. During 
the Civil War, the L^nion government encouraged min- 
ing, because the valuable ores helped pay for the war. 
The Homestead Act of 1862 provided cheap farm land 
for new settlers. So did gifts of huge tracts of land to the 
railroads. At the same time, thousands of Europeans 
wanted to come to America. Revolutionary movements 
had failed in many countries. Poor harvests caused 
famines in Ireland. The Scandinavian nations had be- 
come overpopulated. Government agents increased their 
persecution of the Jews in Russia, Poland, and other 
areas of Central Europe. 

The land between the Missouri River and the Pacific 
Coast forms two great belts, running roughly north and 
south. The grasslands of the Great Plains stretch west 
from the Missouri River to the Rocky Mountains. Be- 
yond the plains, from the Rocky Mountains to the 
Pacific Coast, lies a belt of land with many mountain 
ranges and several valleys. Because the Far West had 
many different land regions and climates, it developed 
on several frontiers, not just one. 

The rush to the west affected both belts of land, but 
it touched the Great Plains only briefly at first. Here 
appeared what the novelist Hamlin Garland called "the 
land of the straddlebug." Locators, or land salesmen, 
picked the best farms on the grassy plains. They marked 
their claims with straddtebugs, three boards fastened to- 
gether like tepee poles. But when homesteaders, or farm- 
ers, arrived later with their families, they often found 
themselves in trouble. They had little protection against 
the Plains Indians. When they rode horses, they could 
not use the long rifles they had carried in the woods. 
Even more serious, the Great Plains lacked water, and 
crops often withered and died. The plains also lacked 
trees, and farmers had difficulty finding wood for shelter, 
fuel, and fences. The surge into this territory slowed 
down. At the same time, adventurous settlers moved 
into the western belt, beyond the Rockies. 



WESTERN FRONTIER LIFE 

Tlie Search for Gold and Silver attracted thousands 
of miners to the western mountains. About 100,000 ad- 
venturers had hurried to California in the gold rush of 
1849. They mined in the Sierra Nevada mountains 
east of Sacramento. However, gold in this area had 
become difficult to mine by the middle 1850's. So the 
prospectors moved eastward looking for strikes, or dis- 
coveries. 

Several areas became important mining centers dur- 
ing the period from 1858 to 1875. The first was in the 
Rocky Mountains west of Denver. It drew a great rush 
of fortune seekers, who vowed to reach "Pikes Peak 
or Bust." Central City and Leadville grew up almost 
overnight in Colorado. A second area centered around 
\'irginia City in western Nevada, and encouraged fur- 
ther discoveries in the desert valleys and mountains. 
Both these areas began as gold fields. But black sand in 
Colorado and blue clay in Nevada clogged the simple 
machines the early miners used. The mines did not 
become profitable until mining companies found that 
the sands and clays contained rich silver deposits. 

A third mining region, in Idaho, Montana, and 
Washington, led to the settlement of such towns as 
Lewiston, Ida.; Helena, Mont.; and Walla Walla, 
Wash. The last great gold rush in the Llnited States took 
place in the Black Hills of South Dakota in 1874 and 
1875. Deadwood, founded in 1876, gained fame as one 
of the last frontier mining camps. 

East Meets West. The swarm of miners into the West 
showed the need for better transportation. Thousands of 
new settlers ran short of supplies. Prospectors could mine 
gold with pick, shovel, and pan, but silver-mining com- 
panies needed heavy machinery to dig the ore, and 
some means of shipping it to smelters. Such needs en- 
couraged companies to build transcontinental railroads. 
Two companies began the first of these railroads in the 
early i86o's, starting from both east and west. From the 
east came the L'nion Pacific, with Irish laborers who 
established such towns as Cheyenne and Laramie, Wyo. 
The Central Pacific line, from the west, had thousands 
of Chinese in its road gangs. The two sets of tracks met 
at Promontory, near Ogden, Utah, in i86g. Other lines 
soon followed, including the Southern Pacific and the 
Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe. See Railroad 
(History). 

With the railroads to supply them, white men had 
little fear of waterless deserts or hostile Indians. The 
growth of railroads almost led to the extermination of the 
bison, or American buffalo. Millions of these animals 
had roamed throughout the West, but hunters soon 
killed most of them. The hunters killed for sport or for 
buffalo hides, but seldom for meat. See Buffalo 
(picture). 

The Cattle Boom. With the railroads came the period 
of "the cattle kingdom" on the Great Plains. Ranching 
started in southern Texas, where farmers raised Mexican 
Longhorn cattle. The ranchers branded the cattle to 
show ownership, and guarded them on horseback as 
they roamed the range. By the end of the Civil War, the 
number of cattle had increased, and people in the North 
had money to buy beef. 

The era of "the long drive" began when the ranchers 
saw that they could ship cattle east if they could get 



187 



Early Settlers in the Far West 

crossed the plains to Oregon or Cal- 
ifornia. Their high Conestogo wagons 
hod already become museum pieces 
by the time of the last frontier. 




A Stagecoach Roars Across the Desert with Indian 
attackers in close pursuit. In Downing the Nigh leader^ 
Frederic Remington caught the drama and excitement that 
symbolize "the Wild West" to people throughout the world. 



Sviday Mornhig fn the Mines by Charles Nahl. Permanent 
Collection E. B. Crocker Art Gallery. Sacramento. California 




In the Gold Fields, some 
miners spent Sunday reading 
the Bible or washing their 
clothes. Others wrestled or 
took port in horse racing. 



Railroads helped tame the 
West. The train at right ran ^ 
out of Virginia City, Nev., on r 
the Virginia &amp; Truckee line. 




«i 



Courtesy J. B. Lippincott Company from 
Frederic Rentington by Harold McCiacken 




The \V...viO(ii r:j.-iri.- RaiIi-M.Tl ( i.rnp.my 



Western Railroads received huge land grants on 
which to build their lines, and sold the surplus to farmers. 
Posters advertising land attracted settlers from Europe 
as well as from the Eastern States. Newcomers, Indians, 
and Western "old hands" created a colorful hubbub at the 
Union Pacific station in Omaha in the late 1 860's, right. 



the animals to the railroads. A favorite route led along 
the Chisholm Trail, which ran from the Me.xican bor- 
der through Austin and Waco, Tex., to Abilene, Kan. 
Farther west, the Western Trail led to Dodge City, Kan. 
Some cattlemen used the Shawnee Trail, which swung 
east to Kansas City, Mo. Millions of cattle plodded 
along these trails, sometimes as many as 4,000 in a 
single drive. California ranchers also bought cattle in 
Texas, and drove them west through Santa Fe. Oregon 
ranchers often took their cattle through Wyoming for 
better pasture land on the way to a railroad. 

The open range did not last long. By 1885, overstock- 
ing had ruined many ranchers. These men had bought 
more cattle than the land could support. Fierce blizzards 
in the winter of 1886- 1887 spelled the end for many 
more. Sheep raisers began moving into the Plains. Their 
herds cropped the grass so short that cattle could not 
graze the land. Farmers built fences on the open range, 
limiting the amount of pasture land. Ranchers tried to 
keep out nesters, or permanent settlers, in a series of 
range wars. But the open range had disappeared, and 
the cattle boom came to an end. 

Homesteading on the Plains. New developments in 
the i87o"s made it possible for eager settlers to farm the 
grasslands. Barbed wire, invented in 1873, provided 
the first cheap substitute for wood fences. Windmills 
solved the problem of bringing up water that lay far 
underground. Agricultural experts worked out methods 
of farming that would work in the dry climate (see Dry 
Farming). With improved machinery, farmers could 
cultivate large areas. The railroads offered cheap land 
to homesteaders. Thousands of settlers moved into 
Kansas, Nebraska, and the Dakotas. The government 
opened a large section of Indian Territory in 1889, and 
the Oklahoma Territory was born (see Indian Terri- 
tory). So much of the Far West had filled up by 1 890 
that the Bureau of the Census declared in a report that 
a definite frontier no longer existed. 

Life on ihe Frontier 

The People of the western frontier formed a varied 
mixture. Americans streamed west from the East Coast, 
the Middle West, and the South. Some men who had 
committed crimes went west because they wanted to 
get as far away from the law as possible. Others found 
life boring in the East, and wanted to try something new 
and different. Professional men and merchants cared 
for the needs of growing communities. Land speculators 
hoped to make quick fortunes. But most settlers were 
farmers, laborers, unskilled mechanics, miners, and 
former soldiers. They wanted to get rich in a hurr)', and 
were willing to risk their lives to do it. 

Many other groups also lived in the Far West. 
Mexicans and Californians had settled in the South- 
west and California since the 1700's. Indians furnished 
cheap labor. Basques from France and Spain worked 
as sheephcrders (see Basque). Scandinavians and other 
Europeans bought farms on the Great Plain?. Miners 



niii^ m MS w mw. 

EMIGRANTS 



l&gt;OOK TO )»1 It 



FARMS AT $3. PER ACREIF "^ 

AND NOT A FOOT OF WASTE LAND. 

FARMS m m YEAES CSEEIT! 



lands nolTavablf for Si\ Voiii-sl 

FARraNG LANDS IN 

""'BM-Ci'"'.".:' "i-'i'./""-" '■'" ■ '" "' -"'.'"■■&gt; i.v/' niF .m-*fji;I 
mim :iil. i&gt;yrr.lir.li i,\ «»'!. aiiunnrn-.tstu to Tiir. Acntl. 
3XTrif:ti HBr.r.n iik.\ nun rit.i\(.i.y uf &gt;^' r [tf:r&gt; 'xpxit 
ii'F ii'.*ir^7rA;: .1' r 




THE CENTRAL BRAJTCH 

niiini(iF!iiii[|iiiiifi.,! 

KICKAPOO INOrAK BESEBVATIOK. 
"' '15:2,41-7 A-Cr^iES. 



came from England and Wales to join the search for 
precious metals. Chinese came to build the railroads, 
then drifted to mining camps where they ran laundries, 
restaurants, and small shops. 

Most frontiersmen fell into two classes, solid folk and 
boomers. The solid folk settled down if they liked the 
life, or went home if they did not. Boomers were always 
heading for a new boom town. They seldom stayed long 
enough to make much money, and squandered their 
earnings in high living. Even among the steady people, 
few persons came to stay, as setders had stayed on the 
land east of the Missouri River. Most of them wanted 
to get rich and go home. 

The frontier was a man's world, and favored the 
jack-of-all-trades. Wyatt Earp served as a marshal, 
sheriff, buffalo hunter, stagecoach driver, and pros- 
pector. Hank Monk, a famous stagecoach driver, also 
mined, and rode the pony express. George Jackson, 
credited with discovering gold in the Rockies, had been 
a sheepherder, prospector, farm hand, miner, and roust- 
about, and later became a businessman. 

Food on the frontier was usually simple. Flour served 
as the basic food, because it was nourishing and did not 
spoil. The people used it in sourdough biscuits and 
bread, and in flapjacks, or pancakes. Other important 
foods included dried beans; game, such as bison, deer, 
elk, antelope, and wild fowl; and preserved meats such 
as bacon, salt pork, and jerky, or dried meat. Cattlemen 
could always eat beef, and sheep raisers had mutton. 
Frontiersmen rarely ate fresh fruit and vegetables or 
dairy products. Even cowboys did not milk cows. 



190 




Almost everyone on the frontier drank strong coffee. 

People on the frontier liad no need for fancy cook- 
ing — the men were too busy, and women were scarce. 
Meat with biscuits or flapjacks provided a feast. Old 
Len Martin of Carson City, Nev., declared while stew- 
ing a chicken that there was no sense "picking a 
chicken too darned close — anybody that don't like the 
feathers can skim 'em off." 

Clothing had to be practical, and most men wore 
the same plain garments day after day. They wore 
cowhide boots; levis, or blue jeans; a wool shirt; a jacket 
or vest; and a felt hat. Some had socks. A man often 
wore a red bandanna handkerchief around his neck to 
protect himself from the dust and cold. Women wore 
sunbonnets and simple calico and gingham dresses. 
Cowboys wore leather chaps to protect their legs from 
brush. Cowboy hats, called sombreros, had a wide brim 
to shield the eyes, and a deep crown so that the hat 
would not blow off. Some men bought deerskin clothes 
from the Indians. But most of the people preferred fine 
imported clothes if they could get them. Wealthy men 
and women bought fashionable clothes from New York 
City, London, or Paris. Men also liked belts decorated 
with silver, and shirts with Mexican embroidery. 

Many frontiersmen, particularly outlaws and law- 
enforcement officers, carried weapons. Especially popu- 
lar were Winchester rifles; Colt revolvers, including the 
famous six-shooter; and Bowie knives (see Revolver 
[picture]; Bowte Knife). 

Amusements on the frontier varied with the area and 
the type of setder. Homesteading families on the plains 



Baker Library, HarvaM University; Library of Congress 



met for square dances, holiday celebrations, and house- 
raising or corn-husking bees. Many miners and cow- 
boys spent most of their leisuretime drinking and gam- 
bling in the saloons that sprang up in every town. 
Dance halls called hurdy-gurdies attracted many people, 
although men often had to dance with each other, be- 
cause women were scarce. Informal rodeos featured ex- 
pert horsemanship and other cowboy skills (see Rodeo). 
Cockfighting became popular in the Southwest (see 
Cockfighting). Throughout the West, people enjoyed 
horse races, shooting contests, and wrestling and boxing 
matches. In larger towns, settlei's welcomed traveling 
dramatic groups and vaudeville shows. They applauded 
such famous performers as Edwin Booth, Laura Keene, 
and Helena Modjeska, and sometimes showered their 
favorites with gold dust and nuggets. 

Religion came to the western frontier even before 
most white settlers arrived. In the early i8oo's, Catholic 
and Protestant missionaries such as Father Pierre 
De Smet and Marcus Whitman had pushed into the Far 
West to convert the Indians (see De Smet, Pierre Jean; 
Whitman, Marcus). But new settlements often grew up 
far from the missions, and people had to rely on travel- 
ing preachers called circuit riders to perform religious 
services. These men rode about constantly. When 
they arrived in a town, they preached sermons and 
conducted marriages, baptisms, and other services for 
people who had sometimes waited many weeks. Among 
farm families on the plains, circuit riders set up Sunday 
schools and held summer camp meetings. See Camp 
Meeting; Circuit Rider. 



191 



WESTERN FRONTIER LIFE 

Frontier Towns sprang up almost overnight. An early 
arrival in Bovard, Nev., told how he passed through 
the town in the morning and noticed four or five tents. 
When he returned in the afternoon, Main Street was a 
mile long and business was booming in a string of tent 
saloons. Some towns, such as Butte, Mont., started as 
shipping points for ore. Others, including Wichita, Kan., 
boomed as cattle transport centers. Many, such as 
Tombstone, Ariz., grew up around mines. Transporta- 
tion centers usually grew and prospered. But most 
nnining camps became ghost towns of rubble and 
sagebrush after the ores had been worked out or metal 
prices fell. 

Most frontier towns provided few comforts. A miner 
often slept outdoors in summer, and built a dugout or 
crude shack in the winter. He might have a tent or 
make a shelter out of rocks, empty bottles, or packing 
cases. Two early settlers in Treasure City, Nev., col- 
lected all the rocks they could find for shelter against 
the winter. The ne.xt spring, they discovered that the 
walls were high-grade silver ore worth $75,000! 

House furnishings were simple and often homemade. 
Miners needed blasting powder more than fine dishes. 
They papered their shacks with newspapers to make 
them warmer. Today, visitors can sometimes still read 
about events in a ghost town on the walls of its crum- 
bling buildings. A few wealthy persons shipped in 
furniture, tableware, and wallpaper at great expense. 
If a town became fairly permanent, the people built 
board sidewalks on each side of the dirt streets, lined 
\vith poles and stakes for hitching posts. Square false 
fronts made small buildings look impressive. 

Life in frontier towns was difficult. People often 
lacked conveniences, and even necessities. Usually the 
only water available in mining camps was wami and 
dirty. Sometimes men hauled water many miles, and 
sold it for several dollars a barrel. In many areas on the 
plains, no trees grew for miles. 

Because of such shortages, western towns often grew 
in groups, such as the one built around \'irginia Cit\', 
Nev. The rich silver and gold mines of the Comstock 
Lode centered around \'irginia Cit&gt;', but the town had 
no wood or water. Other towns grew up nearby to 
supply these needs. Empire became a smelter town on 
the Carson River; Washoe, near the Sierra Nevadas, 
supplied fuel; and Reno grew up where the local rail- 
road joined the main line of the Central Pacific. 

During the 20-year period between i860 and 1880, the 
Comstock Lode yielded more than $300,000,000 worth 
of ore. Because of this great wealth, all the comforts of 
the day soon appeared in V'irginia City, .^t first, supplies 
came in by muleback, a few at a time. When a road 
was built, slow freight wagons brought supplies. Finally, 
a railroad served the town with several trains a da&gt;'. By 
1878, \"irginia Cit\- had 38,000 persons, 20 laundries, 
54 dr)'-goods stores, 6 churches, and 150 saloons. The 
vice-president of the express company built a four-storv,- 
French-srv'le mansion. .'\n opera house and several 
theaters presented Italian light operas, vaudeville, lec- 
tures, and even Shakespeare's plays. The miners' union 
had a librar)'. A local newspaper, the Territorial Enter- 
prise, employed a young reporter who began writing 
under the name of Mark Twain. Kx. anv time", a man 



might find silver ore in his basement and be worth 
$1,000,000 the next day. His neighbors had to be care- 
ful that they and their children did not fall into his 
new mine. 

Life in the Country resembled that in the towns, 
except that settlers found it harder to obtain supplies. 
Prospectors roamed about with supplies loaded on a 
burro or two, but they had to return to a mining camp 
when they ran short. Country life on the frontier usually 
meant living on a ranch or a farm. 

Ranehes usually lay in mountain valleys watered by 
melting snow, or in broad uplands that had some mois- 
ture. Most ranches consisted only of a few simple build- 
ings and some corrals, or cattle pens surrounded by high, 
strong fences made of stakes and poles. The grassland 
of the open range provided pastures. The "Texas 
house," two log cabins joined by a roofed space, 
developed into the ranch-style house of today. The 
rancher used one cabin for cooking and eating, and the 
other for sleeping. As the ranch grew, the rancher might 
build a house for his family, a cookshack, and a bunk- 
house for the hands, or cowboys. 

Cattlemen let their herds graze on the open range, 
so they needed few buildings and no fences. But they 
did need cowboys to turn the cattle out to graze in 
spring, and move them to rich mountain pastures. 
Cowboys constantly guarded the herds against moun- 
tain lions and bands of msders. In the fall, all the 
ranchers in an area held a roundup to gather in the 
cattle. Cowboys had already marked the grown catde 
by branding them or cropping their ears. Men from 
each ranch sorted out these cattle by their markings. 
New calves followed their mothers. Then the cowboys 
cropped the ears of the calves or branded them with the 
owner's mark. 

Cowboys also drove herds to "cow towns" to be 
shipped east on the railroads. On ""the long drive," 
cattle moved in long lines, with riders ahead, behind, 
and on both sides. .•\ chuck wagon carried food for the 
cowboys, and a wrangler took care of extra horses. When 
all went well, the cattle moved slowly but steadily. But 
they sometimes starrxpeded when they were afraid to 
swim a river, or were frightened by Indians or rusders. 
After several weeks, the drive plodded into a cow town 
such as Abilene or Dodge City, where cowboys loaded 
the cattle into freight cars. For a description of cowboys 
and their work, see Cowboy; Ranching. 

Farms, unlike ranches, depended on the soil, not the 
grass. Farmers plowed the grass under and raised grain, 
mainly wheat. Grasshoppers, hot winds, and prairie 
fires often made life hard for setders on the plains. So 
did the ranchers, who resented the barbed-wire fences 
that destroyed the open range. Bloody fights developed 
in the range wars, or barbed-wire wars, that followed. 
Farmers fenced in watering places or blocked trails, then 
cattlemen cut the wires. Barbed wire finally won, and 
farms spread farther and farther out over the rich grass- 
lands of die Great Plains. 

Life on the plains resembled that of (jioneers east 
of the Missouri River. But there was a basic difference. 
\Vhile the farmer in Ohio might have too many trees, 
the farmer on the plains usually had no wood at all. 
The w^estern farmer's land has often been called "the 
sod-house frontier," because so many men built houses 
of dirt and sod. \ farmer plowed furrows of sod and cut 



192 



Virginia City bustled with 
activity in the 1860's. The 
town perched 6,500 feet high 
in the Sierra Nevada, close to 
Mt. Davidson, site of the fabu- 
lous Comstock Lode. 




A Teamster Who "Strucic It Ricli" built 
this mansion near Virginia City. Sandy Bowers 
later went "ter Yoorup" to spend his fortune. 



ihem crosswise into blocks about a foot square. He 
piled rows of sod blocks on top of each other to make 
walls, and covered them with a thatch roof Sometimes 
he brought wood with him and built a frame to support 
the roof, or found a little wood nearby. A sod house 
remained warm in winter and cool in summer, but it 
had many disadvantages. Dirt sifted down on the food, 
cmmbled from the walls, and rose from the clay floor. 
Rats and mice lived in the thatch, and snakes and 
gophers often dug tunnels through the walls or floor. 
For fuel, the famier used twigs, grass, corncobs, peat, 
and buffalo chips, or manure. Later, settlers often im- 
proved their saddles by whitewashing the walls and haul- 
ing in lumber for doors and ceilings. 

Transportation and Communication 

Transportation varied with the area and the means 
at hand. Until the railroads appeared, travel was always 
slow and uncomfortable, and often dangerous. Dis- 
tances were great, roads few and bad, and schedules 
irregular. 

Most people traveled by stagecoach. A group of 
passengers could defend themselves more easily against 
Indians or bandits than a person alone. One famous 
line, the Butterfield Overland Express, ran four coaches 
weekly between St. Louis and San Francisco. The 
coaches bumped along day and night, covering about 
I GO miles in 24 hours. The passengers, grimy with dust 
in summer and shivering with cold in winter, tried to 
sleep on the hard seats. Crude wood or adobe "stations" 
every 10 miles or so provided food for both passengers 



and horses. Travelers faced the constant danger of 
robbery and Indian attack. Traveling alone was even 
more dangerous, but people in a hurry rode horseback. 
Settlers moving with their families traveled in wagons. 

Wagon trains served as the best means of hauling 
freight before railroads were built. They usually in- 
cluded about 25 heavy, high-wheeled wagons, each 
pulled by a team of 6 to 20 o.xen or mules. Men called 
bullwhackers or mule skinners drove the wagons and 
guarded the freight. The wagons lumbered along at a 
mile or two an hour, or about 100 miles in a seven-day 
week, because "there was no Sunday west of Omaha." 
The wagons hauled ore from the mines and brought in 
mining machinery and blasting powder. They carried 
the food and water that made life possible in desert 
camps. If blizzards stopped the wagons, the price of 
flour might soar to $100 a sack. Famous freight lines 
included Ben HoUaday's Central Overland California 
and Pikes Peak Express Company, and the Wells, 
Fargo line (see Wells, Fargo &amp; Company). Frontiers- 
men also used burros as pack animals for carrying goods. 
Some even used camels, imported from Asia because 
they could live on the desert (see Camel [History]). 

Communication. News traveled slowly, most of it by 
stagecoach. A letter took months to go from California 
to the Middle West, and snows in the mountains cut off 
almost all communication in winter. 

The pony express carried the mail between St. 
Joseph, Mo., and Sacramento, Calif, a distance of 
almost 2,000 miles. As Mark Twain described it, "There 
were about eighty pony-riders in the saddle all the time, 




Jesse James, according to an old ballad, "killed many a man, 
and robbed the Glendale train." He and his gang terrorized Mis- 



Massio. -Missouri Resouices Div. 

souri for several years. The scene above, by Thomas Hart Benton, 
is a section of a mural in the state Capitol at Jefferson City. 



night and day, stretching in a long, scattering proces- 
sion . . . forty flying eastward and forty toward the 
west." At first, it cost $5 to send a half ounce of mail by 
pony express, so that this volume of The World Book 
Encyclopedia, for example, would have cost more 
than $450 to send. Pony-express riders changed horses 
about every 25 miles, and new riders took over every 
75 miles. The pony express covered about 250 miles a 
day, so that mail traveled from St. Joseph to Sacra- 
mento in eight or nine days. This remarkable system 
began in April, 1860, but lasted only about 18 months. 
It was discontinued after the telegraph reached Cali- 
fornia in October, 1861. See Pony Express. 

Law and Order 

Farm families on the frontier lived quietly, but crime 
flourished in the mining camps and ''cow towns." These 
isolated settlements often had great wealth in precious 
metals, and attracted many men who came only to 
cheat and steal. Other men meant well, but wanted to 
have a good time. This often meant drinking and 
gambling, which sometimes led to fighting and killing. 
"The wild West" had little difficulty living up to its 
nickname. 

Crime often resulted from the temptations of gold 
and silver. A miner who had "struck it rich" usually 
celebrated by getting drunk. Then he might be stabbed 
and robbed, or cheated in a poker game by a cardsharp 
who used a marked deck of cards. Gold and silver also 
tempted bandits, who followed shipments on their way 
to California or to the East. They picked a deserted spot 
in which to attack a wagon or stagecoach. Criminals 
also included claim jumpers, who illegally took over mine 
claims that belonged to someone else. Confidence men, or 



swindlers, often sold worthless stocks. Many dealt in 
'"salted" mines, selling worthless holes after putting in 
small amounts of good ore. 

Horses, cattle, and sheep also provided a temptation 
for lawbreakers. The animals roamed great areas, and 
could be moved under their own power. Rustlers stole 
cattle from the range, drove them to a shebaiig, or hide- 
out, and altered their brands. One valley in the Pah- 
ranagat Range of southeastern Nevada became a refuge 
for rustlers who roamed through Utah, Arizona, 
Nevada, and Idaho. A rider passing through the valley 
could count as many as 350 different brands on cattle 
stolen from as many ranches. One story tells of a sheriff 
who returned from such a robbers' roost looking tri- 
umphant. "Get your man?" somebody asked. "No," 
the sheriff" replied, "but I rode plumb through the place 
without getting shot." 

Distiubances also arose from the constant feuding 
between cattlemen and the sheep owners and farmers. 
The Lincoln County War inflamed New Mexico in 
1878. Army troops and Governor Lew Wallace finally 
quieted the rival cattlemen. See New Mexico (Terri- 
torial Days). 

In 1890, cattlemen in Johnson County, Wyoming, 
imported a trainload of gunmen to terrorize farmers. 
The army finally ended this Johnson County Cattle 
War after several killings on both sides. See Wyoming 
(The Johnson County Cattle War). 

The desperadoes, or outlaws, usually worked together 
in gangs, such as those led by Henry Plummer, the 
Younger brothers, "the Dalton boys," and Frank and 
Jesse James. They robbed banks, trains, and stage- 
coaches throughout large areas. Sam Bass once stole 
$60,000 in gold from a single Union Pacific train travel- 



194 



ing through Nebraska. Billy the Kid was said to have 
killed 21 men. Some of the most famous desperadoes 
were honest and kindly until drink or anger aroused 
them. Then they became killers. But even among law- 
breakers, the code of the West demanded that men give 
each other a chance to defend themselves. A gunman 
who shot from behind or attacked an unarmed man 
was considered a coward. Outlaws who obeyed this code 
had many friends and admirers in spite of their crimes. 
They came to symbolize the independence and vitality 
of the West, and many legends grew up around them. 
Sooner or later most of them were shot or hanged. 

Law Enforcement. When Americans settled unor- 
ganized territon- in the Far West, they brought with 
them federal, state, and local laws from their former 
homes. Even miners often adopted simple codes. But 
these laws did not always help new communities. Often 
they did not take into account new and different situa- 
tions, such as cattle rustling. Even when laws suited a 
community, enforcement proved difficult because of the 
great distances between setdements. For example, the 
sheriff at Pioche, Nev., was responsible for law and order 
as far away as the mining camp of El Dorado, 300 miles 
distant. If the sheriff did capture a murderer, there was 
often no jail to keep him in. And the outlaw's friends 
might kill innocent citizens to free him. Every man had 
to be ready to "shoot it out.'" Judge Roy Bean, "the law 
west of the Pecos," held court in his saloon in Langtry, 
Te.x., with the aid of a single law book and a six-shooter. 

But law-abiding people lived in all parts of the 
frontier, and sooner or later they established order. The 
West often found law officers as fearless as the outlaws 
themselves. Many served as federal marshals. Tom 
Smith, the marshal of Abilene, Kan., did not drink or 
swear, but he shocked a tough cow town into behaving 
by knocking out armed men with his bare fists. Other 
famous marshals included Wyatt Earp, "Bat" Master- 



WESTERN FRONTIER LIFE 

son, Ben Thompson, and "Wild Bill" Hickok, who 
succeeded Smith. The Texas Rangers also helped main- 
tain law and order (see Texas Rangers). 

The citizens themselves provided another answer to 
the problem of law enforcement. They banded together 
in groups of vigilantes to capture and punish criminals. 
Sometimes these groups killed innocent men in their 
haste, but most victims deseived the punishment they 
received. See \'igilante. 

Indian Fighting disturbed the frontier for many years. 
The federal government had reserved large areas of 
western land for Indian use throughout the iSoo's, but 
land-hungr\' white settlers constantly moved into these 
sections. Agents of the Indian Bureau tried to protect 
the Indians and to enforce regulations for both Indians 
and whites. But most frontier troops, stationed in about 
100 posts throughout the West, agreed with the claim 
many westerners made that "the only good Indians are 
dead Indians." In 1864, an army force slaughtered 
more than 400 peaceful Arapaho and Cheyenne In- 
dians near Sand Creek, Colorado. Events of this kind, 
and the revenge they inspired, aroused the whole 
frontier. For the story of Indian wars in the West, see 
Indi.\n Wars. 

An American Tradition 

The frontier is gone now. Most of its mining camps 
have become empty ghost towns. Other settlements of 
the wild West have grown into peaceful communities. 
Denver, Cheyenne, Boise, and Salt Lake City now 
stand where settlers once pitched their tents. But western 
frontier life left behind a great American tradition because 
of its dramatic appeal. Even before ■'Buffalo Bill" Cody 
organized his "Wild West Show" in 1883, the western 
frontier had captured the interest of people in all parts 



tV, Texas LonghoTns, by Tom Lea, collection of the Dallas Museum of Fine Arts 





Arizona Highways 



Cowboys changed horses often, and kept a 
"pool" of extras, called a remudo. Ross San- 
tee's sketch shows a wrong/er, who looked 
after them. 



Texas Longhorn Cattle, hardy and fierce, 
were descended from wild cattle brought to 
America by the Spanish. Ranch owners branded 
them or notched their ears to identify them. 



195 



WESTERN FRONTIER LIFE 

of the world. Books, stories, paintings, songs, plays, and 
motion pictures about the old West still pour forth in a 
seemingly endless stream. Almost 450 works have 
appeared about Billy the Kid alone — including poems, 
novels, plays, ballets, and motion pictures. The West 
has also produced its own folklore heroes. Febold 
Feboldson performed amazing feats on the sod-house 
frontier of the Great Plains. Pecos Bill taught the cow- 
boys all they knew, and even showed broncos how to 
buck. See Febold Feboldson; Pecos Bill. 

Many works of poor quality have strayed far from 
the truth, presenring only the most sensational parts of 
frontier life. But other works have artistic merit, and 
give a taie picttire of those who settled the West. 

Literature. Most of the eady writing about the West 
came from men who had taken part in its development. 
Mark Twain's Roughiiig It became a frontier classic. 
Bret Harte's short stories and Joaquin Miller's poems 
found admirers in Europe as well as the United States. 
One of the most important novels about the West, 
Owen Wister's The Virginian, did much to stimulate 
interest in the subject. Andy Adams, a cowboy, gave a 
truer picture of ranch life in The Log of a Cowboy. One 
of Emerson Hough's many novels. The Covered Wagon, 
became a popular motion picture. Hamlin Garland, 
with A Son of the Middle Border, and the Norwegian 
immigrant O. E. Rolvaag, with Giants in the Earth, 
immortalized the sod-house frontier. Zane Grey wrote 
more than 50 colorful western novels. Later books about 
the frontier include Walter Van Tilburg Clark's The 
Oxbow Incident, Conrad Richter's The Sea of Grass, and 
A. B. Guthrie's The Big Sky. 

Music of the West, like literature, has been mainly 
popular, rather than serious. Famous cowboy songs 
include "The Chisholm Trail," "The Lone Prairie," 
and "Streets of Laredo." Many of these ballads grew 
out of English or Spanish folk songs that the cowboys 
sang to quiet the catde, or to help fill the long, lonely, 
empty hours. Serious music with western themes in- 
cludes Giacomo Puccini's opera The Girl of the Golden 
West, Aaron Copland's ballets Billy the Kid and Rodeo, 
Ferde Grofe's Grand Canyon Suite, and Hershey Kay's 
ballet Western Symphony. One of the most popular of all 
American musical plays, Oklahoma!, by Richard 
Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein H, tells how the cow- 
boys clashed with the "hoe hands," or farmers. 

Art. The color of the western landscape and the 
vigor of mnning horses, stampeding cattle, and itigged 
men have appealed to many artists. Frederic Reming- 
ton, probably the most famous, painted and drew over 
2,700 pictures of the West. Remington learned life on 
the frontier at first hand, and preserved it in realistic 
paintings, sketches, and statues. Others who have 
painted the West include Charles Marion Russell and 
N. C. Wyeth. Many arusts, including Thomas Hart 
Benton and Georgia O'Keeffe, have used western back- 
grounds. Will James, Tom Lea, Ross Santee, and others 
have illustrated their own books on the West. 

Entertainment. Motion pictures and television have 
made western frontier life familiar to people everywhere. 
With cowboys and soldiers fighting outlaws and Indians, 
the "western" offers endless opportunities for battles and 
thrilling chases through mountains and deserts. The 

196 



Squaw Man of 19 14, one of the first full-length films 
made in Hollywood, began a trend that continues 
today. William S. Hart, a typical two-gun cowboy, 
became a national hero. Other motion-picture cowboy 
idols have included Hariy Carey, Buck Jones, Tom 
Mix, Roy Rogers, and William Boyd, who made the 
first "Hopalong Cassidy" film in 1934. Many "westerns" 
provide poor entertainment, but some have been fine 
motion pictures. Among these, such films as Stagecoach 
and High Noon achieved a high level. On the stage. 
Will Rogers gained fame as "the cowboy philosopher." 
Radio and television present hundreds of western 
dramas every year. Rodeos, especially in the Western 
States, feature daring cowboys who ride bucking broncos 
and wild cattle. Thousands of persons spend vacations 
on dude ranches, dressing like cowboys in settings that 
try to recapture a bygone era. Charlton Laird 

Related Articles. See the articles on the various Western 
States, such as Montana. See also the following articles: 



Bass, Sam 
Bean, Judge Roy 
Billy the Kid 
Buffalo Bill 



Ballet (picture, 

American Ballet) 
Boom Town 
Circuit Rider 
Comstock Lode 
Cowboy 
Ghost Town 



Famous Westerners 

Calamity Jane 
Deadwood Dick 
Earp, Wyatt B. S. 
Fargo, William G. 



Unclassified 

Homestead Law 

Indian Wars 

Pioneer Life 

Pony Express 

Ranching 

Rodeo 

Texas Rangers 

Outline 



Hickok, "Wild 

Bill," James B. 
James, Jesse W. 
Oakley, Annie 



Trails of Early 

Days 
Vigilante 
Wells, Fargo &amp; 

Company 
Westward 

Movement 



I. Building the Frontier 

A. The Search for Gold and Silver 

B. East Meets West 

C. The Cattle Boom 

D. Homesteading on the Plains 
II. Life on the Frontier 

A. The People E. Religion 

B. Food F. Frontier Towns 

C. Clothing G. Life in the Country 

D. .'\musements 
III. Transportation and Communication 





A. Transportation 


B. 


Communication 


IV. 


Law and Order 








A. Crime 


C. 


Indian Fighting 




B. Law Enforcement 






V. 


An American Tradition 








A. Literature 


C. 


Art 




B. Music 


D. 


Entertainment 




Quest 


ons 





Why was there so much crime on the western fron- 
tier? How did settlers enforce the law? 

Why were traveling preachers called circuit riders? 

What ended the period of the open range? 

How did the first transcontinental railroad affect the 
development of the western frontier? 

Why was the western farmer's land often called "the 
sod-house frontier"? 

What caused flour to become worth $100 a sack? 

Why did some frontiersmen try using camels for trans- 
portation? 

Why did some western towns grow up in groups? 

What forms of entertainment have made western fron- 
tier life more popular than ever? 

Why did the pony express last for only about 18 
months? 



WESTERN HEMISPHERE. See Hemisphere. 

WESTERN ILLINOIS UNIVERSITY is a stale-supported 
coeducational school at Macomb, 111. Courses offered 
lead to bachelor's and master's degrees in education. 
The university was founded in 1899. For enrollment, 
see L'.MVERSiTiEs AND COLLEGES (table). 

WESTERN ISLES. .See Hebrides. 

WESTERN KENTUCKY STATE COLLEGE is a coedu- 
cational college at Bowling (ircen, Ky. The college 
offers courses in the liberal arts, education, sciences, 
home economics, agriculture, industrial arts, physical 
education, and music. It offers a master's degree in 
education. The college was founded in 1906. For en- 
rollment, see U.N'A'ERsiTiES AND COLLEGES (table). 

WESTERN MARYLAND COLLEGE. See Uni\ersi- 
TiES AND Colleges (table). 

WESTERN MEADOW LARK is the state bird of Kan- 
sas, Montana. Nebraska, North Dakota, and Oregon. 
See Me.\do\v Lark. 

WESTERN MICHIGAN UNIVERSITY is a state-sup- 
ported coeducational university at Kalamazoo, Mich. 
It has schools of applied arts and sciences, business, 
education, liberal arts and sciences, and graduate 
studies. Courses lead to bachelor's and master's degrees. 
Western Michigan has the largest school of occupa- 
tional therapy in die United States. Founded in 1903 
as a teachers college, the university took its present 
name in 1957. For enrollment, see Universities and 
Colleges (table). l^M^:s w. muhr 

WESTERN MONTANA COLLEGE OF EDUCATION is 
a coeducational state-controlled school at Dillon. Mont. 
Courses in elementary and secondar)' education lead to 
bachelor's and master's degrees. It was founded as 
State Normal School in 1893 and became a college in 
1897. In 1949, it took its present name. For enrollment, 
see U-Nr^TRsmEs a.\d Colleges (table). 

WESTERN NEW MEXICO UNIVERSITY. See Uni- 
versities AND Colleges (table). 

WESTERN NEWSPAPER UNION (WNU), a newspaper 
feature syndicate and equipment supply firm, served 
small newspapers in the United States for almost 100 
years. It supplied features, mostly to weekly news- 
papers, in the form of stereotype plates and mats. 
U'NU also published Publishers Auxiliary, one of the 
nation's oldest newspaper trade publications. WNU 
discontinued its features in 1952. In 1962, the National 
Editorial Association purchased Publishers Auxiliary. 
Western Newspaper Union developed out of a "ready- 
print'' service started in the early 1860's by George A. 
Joslvn. 

WESTERN ONTARIO, UNIVERSITY OF, is a coeduca- 
tional school at London, Ontario, Canada. It is pri- 
vately supported, but receives some aid from the gov- 
ernment. Its divisions include arts and science, medicine, 
business administration, engineering, law, music, and 
nursing. It is affiliated with Huron College (Church of 
England); St. Peter's .Seminary College of Arts (Roman 
Catholic); Christ the King College (Roman Catholic); 
and Ursuline College of Arts (Roman Catholic), all 
at London. The school teams are called Mustangs, 
and the school colors are purple and white. The univer- 
sity was founded in 1878. For enrollment, see Canada 
(Education [table]). R. A. Allen 

WESTERN RESERVE. In 1662, King Charles II of Eng- 
land granted the colony of Connecticut a charter. This 



WESTFALEN 

charter gave Connecticut title to lands which stretched 
westward froin the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific. In 
1 786, Connecticut gave to the new United States gov- 
ernment the great stretch of western land which it held 
under its original charter. But Connecticut kept a strip 
of land bordering Lake Erie in Ohio. This strip was 
called the ]Vestcrn Reserve. It extended westward about 
120 miles from the nonhwestern boundars' of Pennsyl- 
vania, and covered 3,667,000 acres. In 1795 and 1796, 
the Connecticut Land Company bought most of it for 
Sl,200.000. In 1800, Connecticut and die U.S. govern- 
ment agreed to attach the land as a county to the Ohio 
territory. See also Cleveland. Richard Hofstadti:r 

WESTERN RESERVE UNIVERSITY is an independent 
privately endowed school at Cleveland, Ohio. It in- 
cludes coeducational colleges of arts and sciences, and 
programs in architecture, teacher education, and busi- 
ness administration. It also has coeducational schools 
of law, dentistry, medicine, social work, library science, 
nursing, and a graduate school. Western Reseive was 
founded in 1826 at Hudson, Ohio, but moved to Cleve- 
land in 1882. For enrollment, see Universities and 
Colleges (table). John s. millis 

WESTERN SAMOA. See Samoa. 

WESTERN UNION TELEGRAPH COMPANY prosides 
the public telegraph system in the L nited .States. It 
handles die nation's telegrams, foreign and domestic 
money orders, and millions of cablegrams. Additional 
billions of words are handled for the nation's press, and 
over private-wire systems. Western L'nion's Telex serv- 
ice enables customers in all parts of the United States to 
communicate with each other and with other sub- 
scribers throughout the world. 

In 1851, a group of Rochester, N.Y., men organized 
the New York and Mississippi Valley Printing Tele- 
graph Company. In 1856, it changed its name to 
Western Union. In 1861, W'estern Union built the first 
transcontinental telegraph line. The company eventu- 
ally built a national system by uniting 540 telegraph 
companies. The last. Postal Telegraph, Inc., merged 
witli \Vestem Union in 1943. 

In the 1950's, Western LTnion set up a high-speed 
system for sending telegrams. The company also pro- 
vided Desk-Fax facsimile machines that send and re- 
ceive telegrams in ''picture" form. 

Western L'nion added 50 million circuit miles to its 
facilities through a nationwide microwave-beam net- 
work in the early 1960's. It expanded its private-wire 
service to industry and government in 1962, enabling 
customers to send messages, weather maps, and other 
visual data. Western L'nion completed Autodin. a com- 
puter system serving the U.S. Department of Defense, 
in 1963. Western L'nion headquarters are at 60 Hudson 
St., New York, N.Y. 10013. 

CiiUCTlly reviewed by WESTERN Union TELEGRAPH COMPANY 

See also Telegraph. 

WESTERN WASHINGTON STATE COLLEGE is a 

state-supported coeducational school in Bellingham, 
Wash. It offers bachelor's degrees in the arts and sci- 
ences and in education, and master's degrees in educa- 
tion. The school was founded in 1899. For enrollment, 
see Universities and Colleges (table). 
WESTFALEN. See Westphalia. 




George Westinghouse 



WESTINGHOUSE, GEORGE 

WESTINGHOUSE, GEORGE (1846-1914), an Ameri- 
can inventor and manufacturer, invented the air brake 
for railroad trains. He introduced alternating current 
for electric power transmission and built a system for 
conducting natural gas to homes. 

Westinghouse was born 
on Oct. 6, 1846, at Cen- 
tral Bridge, N.Y. As a boy, 
he worked in his father's 
machine shop. At 15 he in- 
vented a rotary engine. 
After serving in the army 
and navy during the Civil 
War, he attended Union 
College for a year. 

By 1866, he had already 
perfected two inventions, 
a device for replacing de- 
railed railroad cars and a 
railroad frog, which made 
it possible for a train to 
pass from one track to another. Westinghouse perfected 
the air brake in 1 868. The brake was immediately suc- 
cessful, and he organized a company to produce it. He 
patented 400 inventions and organized 60 companies, 
including the Westingliouse Electric Company. He was 
elected to the Hall of Fame in 1955. Harold F. Williamson 
See also Braki:. 

WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC CORPORATION is one 
of the world's largest producers of machines and equip- 
ment that control, distribute, generate, and use electric 
power. It produces 8,000 products that range from 
cofTeepots and light bulbs to computers and nuclear 
reactors. The company sells its products throughout 
the world. 

For electric utilities and industry, Westinghouse 
builds steam and gas turbines, transformers, motors, 
and electrical control equipment of many kinds. It 
also develops entire electrical systems for industry and 
the armed services. Its construction and consumer 
products include air-conditioning, lighting, and X-ray 
equipment, and many types of electrical appliances for 
the home. 

The corporation designed and developed the nuclear 
portion of the first full-scale atomic-power plant for 
generating electric power, at Shippingport, Pa. It has 
designed and built reactors and atomic equipment for 
many other nuclear-powered generating stations through- 
out the United States and overseas. Atomic reactors 
produced by Westinghouse provide power for most of 
the U.S. Navy's nuclear-powered ships, including the 
Nautilus and Polaris submarines. 

Main Westinghouse offices are in Pittsburgh. The 
company owns and operates many radio and television 
stations. It was founded by George Westinghouse in 
1886. For assets and number of employees, see Manu- 
facturing (table, 100 Leading U.S. Manufacturers). 

ClUic.Tlly Itvitwt'ii l.y the VV'ESTINGIIOUSE ELECTRIC CORPORATION 

WESTMAR COLLEGE is a coeducational school at Le 
Mars, Iowa. It is affiliated with the Evangelical United 
Brethren Church. Courses in liberal arts and teacher 
training lead to B.A., B.Mus., and B.Mus.Ed. degrees. 
The school also offers courses in industual arts 



Westmar College was founded in 1 890. For enrollment, 
see L'ni\t,rsitifs .\nd Colleges (table). 

WESTMINSTER, the government district of London. 
See LrjNDON (London from the Air). 

WESTMINSTER, STATUTE OF. See Canada, Gov- 
ernment OF (Relations with Great Britain). 

WESTMINSTER ABBEY is a great national church 
that stands near the Houses of ParliaiTient in London. 
This church is world-famous and is one of the most 
beautiful in England. Its official name is the Collegi- 
ate Church of Saint Peter. Its name of Abbey comes 
from the fact that it once served as the church of an 
ancient monaster)'. 

Westminster Abbey marked the scene of many great 




The Coronation Chair in Westminster Abbey was built to enclose 
the Stone of Scone, which Edward 1 seized from Scotland in 1 297. 

Westminster Abbey in London is a shrine of the British Com- 
monwealth and the burial place of Britain's honored dead. 

Pix 



198 




events in English history'. All the English mlers from 
the time of \Villiam the Conqueror, except Edward \' 
and Edward \'III, were crowned there. In the chapel 
of Edward the Confessor stands the old Coronation 
Chair that dates from 1 300. See Coron.-\tion. 

Burial in Westminster Abbey is one of the greatest 
honors England can give. Many kings and queens are 
buried in the chapel of Heniy \'n. Statesmen and other 
great men of England are buried in other parts of the 
Abbey. The bodies of many of England's greatest poets 
lie in the Poet's Corner. 

Westminster Abbey became the seat of a bishop in 
1539. This act made the Abbey a cathedral. Since then, 
however, onh' this one bishop has ever serv'ed there. 
.\ dean has headed the .\bbey from the time of Queen 
Elizabeth I to the present day. 

Edward the Confessor built a church on the site of 
the .\bbey between about 1042 and 1065. But the main 
part of the Abbey was begun in 1 245 by Henr\' I H . He 
imitated French models, and made the Abbey one of 
the best examples of French Gothic architecture in 
England (see Gothic Art). In the 1500's, Henry \'II 
added the chapel that bears his name. The towers were 
completed in 1 740. 

The floor plan of Westminster Abbey is in the shape 
of a Latin cross. The church is 513 feet long. The 
transepts (crossarms) extend 203 feet. The nave (main 
hall) is 38 feet wide and 102 feet high. The twin 
towers on the west are 225 feet high. The square 
central tower of Westminster Abbey barely rises above 
the roof. 

Cloisters surrounding the Abbey date from the 1200"s 
and 1300"s. The chapter house was built in the 1200"s. 
West of the main cloisters is the famous Jerusalem 
Chamber, dating from the 1300's. Air raids in World 
War II damaged parts of the Abbey. A 20-year program 
of complete restoration began in 1953. Alan gowan.s 

WESTMINSTER CHOIR is one of the most famous 
choral organizations in the United States. It was 
founded in 1921 by John Finley Williamson in con- 
nection with the Westminster Choir School (now Col- 
lege) in Princeton, NJ- 

WESTMINSTER COLLEGE is a liberal arts school for 
men at Fulton, Mo. It is under Presbyterian control. 
Courses prepare students for advanced study in medi- 
cine, law, engineering, teaching, business administra- 
tion, and the ministry. Winston Churchill gave his 
famous "iron curtain" speech there on March 5, 1946 
(see Iron Curtain). Westminster College was founded 
in 1851. Forenrollment, see Universities AND Colleges 

(table). Robert L. D. Da\idson 

WESTMINSTER COLLEGE is a coeducational liberal 
arts college at Xew Wilmington, Pa. It is under Presb\'- 
terian control. In addition to liberal arts, it offers busi- 
ness and secretarial science courses and has a consei-vatoiy 
of music. Degrees granted include B.S. and M.S. in 
education. Westminster College was chartered in 1852. 
For enrollment, see Universities and Colleges 

(table). Will W. Orr 

WESTMINSTER COLLEGE is a private coeducational 
liberal arts school in .Salt Lake City, L'tah. It is affiliated 
w ith the Presbyterian, Methodist, and Congregational- 
Christian churches. Graduates receive B.A. or B.S. 
degrees. Special courses are offered in geolog\', engineer- 
ing, social administration, and Christian education. 



WESTPHALIA 

Westminster was founded in 1875. For enrollment, see 

UNrVERSITlES AND COLLEGES (table). Waide M. Condon 

WESTMINSTER HALL is a building connected with 
the House of Parliament in London. Originally, it was 
the great hall of the Palace of Westminster, where the 
rulers of England held coiut for almost 500 years. Many 
great events in English history took place in the hall. 
.Sir Thomas More. Lady Jane Grey, the Earl of Straf- 
ford, and Warren Hastings stood trial there. Charles 
I was condemned to death there. William II built the 
hall in 1099. It is 240 feet long. 68 feet wide, and 89* 

feet high. Talbot Hamlin 

WESTMINSTER KENNEL CLUB SHOW. See Dog (Dog 

.Shows). 

WESTMINSTER SCHOOL is one of the oldest public 
schools of England. Henry \TII founded it in 1540 as 
part of Westminster Abbey. Its official name is Saint 
Peter's College. It became a leading English school 
in the 1800's. 

WESTMINSTER THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY. See 

L'-MNTiRSITIES AND C^OLI.EOES (table), 

WESTMONT COLLEGE is a coeducational private 
school at Santa Barbara, Calif. It offers courses in 
liberal arts and sciences, education, and inissionary and 
ministerial studies. It was founded in 1940 as a re- 
organization of the Western Bible College. For enroll- 
ment, see L'niversities and Colleges (table). 

WESTMORLAND. See England (color map. The 39 
Historic Counties of England). 

WESTMOUNT, Quebec (pop. 25,012; alt. 152 ft.), is a 
residential suburb of Montreal. It was incorporated as 
a village in 1874 and became a city in 1908. It has a 
council-manager form of government. 

WESTON, EDWARD (1850-1936), an inventor and 
manufacturer, was noted for pioneering in the develop- 
ment of electric meters. He began manufacturing 
meters in 1882, and founded the Weston Electric Instru- 
ment Company in 1888. 

Born near Wolverhampton, England, Weston moved 
to the L^nited .States in 1870. He entered the electro- 
plating business, and developed an electroplating 
generator, an arc-lighting system, and an incandescent 

lighting SVStem. Robert p. Multhauf 

WESTOVER AIR FORCE BASE, Mass., houses units of 
the L'..S. .Air Force .Strategic Air Cominand. It covers 
4,269 acres, and lies four miles north of Chicopee Falls. 
It is the site of Eighth .\ir Force headquarters and of an 
air division of jet bombers, tankers, and fighter-inter- 
ceptors. The base served as an aerial port for shipments 
to .Africa and Europe during World War II. It was 
established in 1940, and was named for Maj. Gen. 
Oscar Westover, chief of the air corps, who was killed 

in an air crash in 1938. John H. Thompson 

WESTPHALIA, west FAIL yuh, is a former Prussian 
province of western Germany. Westphalia, or Westjalen 
in German, means western plain. It lies just east of The 
Netherlands, For location, see German-^' (color map). 
Westphalia once belonged to the Duchy of Sa-\ony. In 
the late llOO's, the name ]\'estphalia was given to a 
region ruled by the .Archbishop of Cologne. Prussia 
gained control of the area at the Congress of \'ienna 
(1814-1815). In 1946, Westphalia became part of the 
state of North Rhine- Westphalia. James k. pollock 



199 



P^'-.'T' 





f The Mctri&gt;p.&gt;man Must 



WESTWARD MOVEMENT carried the settlers of North 
America across the entire continent. For more than 200 
years, daring pioneers pushed the frontier westward. 
Hardy men and women blazed trails, cleared land, and 
set up new settlements from the Appalachian Moun- 
tains to the Pacific Ocean. They made it possible for 
others who followed to turn the vast wilderness into 
prosperous lands of farms and cities. The lure of the 
\Vest drew people like a magnet, even though the west- 
ward movement halted for short periods of time. 

No matter what their origin, or « hy they sought new- 
homes, most of the people caught up in the westward 
movement were courageous, hard-working, and helpful 
to their neighbors. Out of the experiences of the west- 
ward movement, an American national character de- 
veloped, with traits and institutions found nowhere else 
in the world. 

The daring pioneers dreamed of a better world in 
which they and their families could live. They had the 
courage to turn their backs on the comforts of civiliza- 
tion and set out into the little-known West to make 
their dreams come true. They had to fight off attacks by 
Indians and shoot wild animals for food. Nature itself 
slowed their progress with thick forests, high mountains, 



Westward 
movement 



Hardy Explorers, Trappers, and Traders led the 

movement westward. Frederic Remington's sculpture of a 
"mountain man" dramatizes the dangerous, lonely jour- 
neys of these men who loved the "wide-open spaces." 



lonely prairies, and long stretches of waterless desert. 

The men, women, and children of the westward move- 
ment struggled across the continent on foot and on 
horseback through the Cumberland Gap. They rode on 
canal barges through the Erie Canal and floated on 
rafts down the broad Ohio. Some went on steamboats 
down the Mississippi and up the Missouri. Others 
loaded all their household goods into covered wagons 
and followed the .Santa Fe and Oregon trails. 

The westward movement took place in several stages. 
The first frontiers along the Atlantic Coast had become 
settled by 1 763. The pioneers then began to move across 
the Appalachian Mountains in the period up to 1815. 
After the War of 1812, pioneers flocked west and south 
to settle the land around the Great Lakes, along the 
Gulf of Mexico, and in the Mississippi Valley. From 
1 840 to 1 860. the settlers moved into Utah, California, 
and the Oregon country. During and after the Civil 
War, cattlemen, miners, and farmers settled the Rocky 
Mountain region and the Great Plains. Finally, in 1 890, 
the Superintendent of the Census announced that a 
frontier no longer separated the settled and unsettled 
parts of the United States. 

For descriptions of the life of the people during this 
period, see the separate articles on Colonial Life in 
America, Pioneer Life, and Western Frontier Life. 

The First Frontiers 

The Original Settlements. America's first frontier was 
really a frontier of Europe. Pioneers created it in the 
early 1600's as they built their villages along the Atlan- 
tic Coast: Jamestown in \'irginia, .St. Maiy's in Mary- 
land, Plyinouth and Boston in Massachusetts, and New 
Amsterdam in New York. As each feeble outpost grew, 
it served as a gateway to the interior. From Jamestown 
and St. Mary's, new settlers from England inoved out 
along the river valleys of the James, the Rappahannock, 
and the Potoinac, where the soils were deep and rich. 
Then they pushed into the higher land that lay between 
the valleys. From Plymouth, Boston, and New Amster- 
dam, settlers spread along the coast, turning forests into 
fields and marshes into pastures. Then they, too, moved 
on, conquering the river bottoms in the Connecticut, 
Merrimac, and Hudson valleys. By 1670, pioneers had 
settled in the coastal lowlands as far as the fail line, 
where waterfalls or rapids stopped navigation. 

The Appalachian Highland. Now the advance into a 
new frontier began. Just west of the fall line lay the hilly 

201 



The Land Ordinance of 1785 provided a framework for 
orderly settlement of the Northwest Territory. Its system of town- 
ships and sections prevented boundary disputes, and was used 
in surveying all the territories later acquired by the United States. 



A Township ts 

6 miles square 
and is divided 
I'nto 36 sections. 








Each Section is 

1 mile square. 



n the Northwest Territory, settlers had 
to wark hard to clear the land for farming. W 
They burned the trees after girdling them, ^ 
or malcing o circular cut so they would die. 



uplands at the base of the Appalachian Mountains. 
Settlers began a new pattern when they occupied this 
area, often called "the Old West." Some pioneers 
moved into the area from the coastal plains, following 
the old pattern of looking for better lands. But others 
were Scotch-Irish and German farmers who fled famine 
and persecution in Europe by the tens of thousands dur- 
ing the early 1 700's. Most of them landed in the new 
colony of Pennsylvania, where William Penn welcomed 
oppressed persons of every race and creed. These new 
farmers could not afford expensive lands near the coast, 
so they moved into the interior of Pennsylvania. Their 
descendants still live in this-region. When these lands 
became occupied, newcomers turned to the north or 
south along the Great Valley of the Appalachians, 
which promised grer ;er opportunity than the rugged 
mountains l&gt;'ing j- ot to the west. Through the years, 
their tidy settlements filled the Shenandoah Valley of 
Virginia, then extended into the mountain valleys of 
the Carolinas. Other settlers turned northward into the 
Hudson and Mohawk valleys of New York. By the 
1 760' s, these communities stretched in a long line that 
bordered the western frontier of the thirteen colonies. 
The pattern of life in "the Old West" reflected the 
frontier surroundings the people faced. The rugged pio- 
neers in this back-country area were separated from 
many contacts with Europe that continued along the 
seaboard. They built log cabins instead of frame houses, 
and wore deerskins rather than imported fabrics. They 
felt more at home in the deep forests than on the streets 
of Philadelphia or Boston. They copied largc."Palatine 



barns" from the Germans, and developed a German 
weapon into the efficient Kentucky rifle, one of the most 
important tools in conquering the wilderness. The 
Scotch-Irish contributed Presbyterian circuit riders, or 
wandering preachers (see Circuit Rider). 

Regional Conflicts. The differences between the fron- 
tier and the East led to quarrels that burst into open 
conflict just before the Revolutionary War. Neither side 
trusted the other. Easterners regarded frontiersmen as 
wild savages who could not handle their own affairs. 
Westerners felt that the wealthy men who lived on the 
seaboard wanted to keep them from governing them- 
selves, and meant to tax them out of existence. These 
conflicts almost led to bloodshed in Pennsylvania in 
1764. Frontiersmen gathered at Paxton and other west- 
ern towns to march on the capital at Philadelphia. 
Benjamin Franklin turned "the Paxton Boys" back be- 
fore anyone was killed. Then trouble flamed in the Caro- 
linas, where pioneers formed a society called "The 
Regulation." Members promised to stop paying taxes 
until they were sure that the money would be spent 
properly. Colonial officials branded the "Regulators" 
as outlaws and sent troops to subdue them. The "rebels" 
lost the Battle of Saluda River in South Carolina in 1769 
and the Battle of Alamance in North Carolina in 1771. 
Many of them fled farther west to escape punishment. 

Across the Mountains, 1763-1815 

Some of the thirteen original colonies claimed land 
to the west of the Appalachian Mountains. But the 
French actually controlled most of this territory until 



202 




after the British won the French and Indian Wars (see 
French and Indian ^VARs). Then the way was open 
for settlers to push into the heart of North America. But 
before the rush could begin, pioneers had to get around 
British restrictions. Great Britain hoped to prevent In- 
dian wars by rigidly regulating the course and speed of 
the westward movement. For this purpose, the British 
government issued the Proclamation of 1 763 (see Frank- 
lin, State of [map]). It decreed that no settlers could 
move into the lands beyond a line drawn through the 
mountains. But pressure from impatient settlers and 
land speculators forced this line steadily westward. The 
treaties of Hard Labor and Fort StanwLx opened tlie 
back counu^' of Mrginia (now West \'irginia), New 
York, and Pennsylvania in 1768. 

New Settlements. The bold frontiersmen paid little 
attention to official borders. As long as good lands lay 
ahead, nothing could hold them back. Between 1 763 
and 1776, frontiersmen pushed forward in three areas. 
One area was western Pennsylvania and what is now 
West Virginia. Settlers transformed Fort Pitt into Pitts- 
burgh, and built their cabins in the nearby river valleys. 
In eastern Tennessee, James Robertson and John Sevier 
helped build busding communities along the Holston, 
Watauga, and Clinch rivers (see Watauga .Associa- 
tion). The third area was the Bluegrass countr\- of Ken- 
tucky—the land of Daniel Boone. In 1775, Boone 
blazed the Wilderness Road through the Cumberland 
Gap and led a band of setders westward to build their 
cabins at Boonesborough (see Wilderness Road). 
Other setders followed, to establish St. Asaph's Station, 



Chicago Historical Society 



Leestown, and other outposts. .All that year, the wilder- 
ness rang Avith the sound of axes and the crash of falling 
trees. 

When the Revolutionary \Var broke out in 1775, In- 
dian raiders, often encouraged by the British, drove 
most of the pioneers back east of the mountains. In 
1 778, George Rogers Clark led an expedition into Illi- 
nois territor\- to attack British outposts that were 
stirring up trouble. His successful exploits were im- 
portant in obtaining the vast Northwest Territor&gt;' for 
the United States (see Northwest Territory; Revo- 
lutionary War in .America [Clark's Campaign]). .As 
soon as the fighting ended, setders surged wesrvvard 
again. By the time .American independence was recog- 
nized inl783, western Pennsylvania teemed with settlers, 
and some 25,000 persons lived;in Kentucky. Eastern 
Tennessee bustled \sith activity. ( 

Solving Frontier Problems. The rapid growth of new 
setdements created many difficulties. The newly formed 
government of the United States had to find some %vay 
to sell land, provide government for the West, and get 
the Indians to withdraw peacefully. The first two prob- 
lems were solved brilliandy. 

The Ordinance of 1785 provided for surveys of the 
Northwest Territon- into townships six miles square. 
Townships were divided into sections of one square 
mile, or 640 acres. The sections were sold at auction at a 
minimum price of S 1 an acre. This system freed settlers 
from conflicts over land titles. 

The Xorthwest Ordinance, or Ordinance of 1 78 / , set up 
government for the new area. This ordinance assured 



203 



In the 1760'S/ settlers had pushed 
westward into the Appalachian high- 
lands. Some had gone beyond the 
mountains, in spite of a law against it. 



By 1 783, small communities had 
grown up as far west as the Ohio 
River. The newly independent nation 
had to find ways of protecting and 
governing these outlying territories. 



A 4L 4 1 



ff 



)* 



4, 






^&gt;\ 




During the Early 1 800's, land- 
hungry pioneers staked out claims in ^'-v 
the fertile areas beyond the Missis- \ -^"^^ 
sippi River. Traders, trappers, and a VX. J^ A 
explorers ventured even farther west. * '^* i* 



^ 






As Early as 18 50, Americans had / ^^^?JI^ 
reached the Pacific Coast. During the I '-^^ngc 
next 40 years, miners, ranchers, and 
farmers filled up the sparsely set- 
tled regions of the Great Plains, 





RED-LETTER DATES IN THE WESTWARD MOVEMENT 



1775 
1778- 
1785 
1787 

1794 

1795 

1803 

1804- 

1825 

1845 
1846 

1846. 

1848 

1862 

1869 

1890 



Daniel Boone opened the Wilderness Road, and 
made possible the first settlement of Kentucky. 
■1779 George Rogers Clark's campaign won the 
Northwest Territory for the United States. 
The Land Ordinance provided an orderly system 
for surveying and selling government lands. 
The Northwest Ordinance provided for govern- 
ment and encouraged education in the Northwest 
Territory. 

Victory over the Indians and a treaty with Great 
Britain brought peace to the Northwest Territory. 
Pinckney's Treaty with .Spain opened the mouth 
of the Mississippi River to .\merican navigation. 
The Louisiana Purchase opened a vast area beyond 
the Mississippi River to American settlers. 
■1806 Lewis and Clark explored the Louisiana Ter- 
ritory. 

The Erie Canal opened, providing improved trans- 
portation westward. 
The United .States annexed Texas. 
A treaty with Great Britain added the Oregon 
country to the United States. 

■ 1848 War with Mexico resulted in the acquisition of 
California and the .Southwest. 

The discovery of gold in California inspired the 
gold rush. 

The Homestead Act promised free land to settlers 
in the West. 

The Union Pacific became the first railroad to cross 
the continent. 

Settlement of the main areas of the western United 
States brought an end to the frontier. 




The Museum of Science and Industry, Chicago 

Pioneers East of the Mississippi often walked all 
the way in order to spare their livestock. They usually 
found fuel, water, and plentiful game along the trail. 
Joshua Shaw, an early pioneer, drew these sketches of 
the men end women with whom he traveled in the 1 820's. 



Bettmaon Archive 



Crossing tlie Piains, settlers 
faced severe hardships. New 
graves and abandoned wag- 
ons marked many of the trails 
leading west. But most people 
pressed onward in spite of 
fuel and water shortages, bad 
weather, and hostile Indians, 




CAIiirbRNIA LINE 




SAILING BEQULAnLV ON ADVERTISED D-&gt;VS. 

CLIPPER OF TDESDAY BEC nth 





GALATEA 

&gt;&lt; IMii:i.r., t •nisaR-trr. !• n*« rapldli laiiiH«« 

At Pier 11 East River 

WM. T. COLEMAN &amp; CO. 



"Gold Fever^' Infected Almost Everyone. San Fran- 
cisco Harbor in the winter of 1852-1853 presented an odd 
sight. Hundreds of ships had been left to rot while their 
crews went off to "strike it rich" in the gold fields. 



STIUOKT, Tontino Bttil&lt;Uzt£ 



ne Historical Association, Mystic. Conn 



The Gold Rush carried thousantds of Americons westward 
after miners discovered tlie precious metal in 1848. A 
clipper ship could make the trip from New York City to 
California, sailing around Cape Horn, in about 1 1 5 days. 



pioneers that they would not lose their right to self-gov- 
ernment when they moved to the frontier. See North- 
west Ordi.n.\nce. 

Removal of the Indians proved more difficult. European 
governments used the Indians as pawns in their efforts 
to harass the weak new United States. British agents en- 
couraged Indians in the Northwest Territory to go on 
the warpath in the early 1 790's. The Indians defeated 
two expeditions before General Anthony Wayne led a 
third party that routed them in the Battle of Fallen 
Timbers in 1794 (see Indian Wars [Other Midwestern 
ConflictsI). A year later, Wayne forced the Indians to 
sign the Treaty of Greenville, in which they surrendered 
the southern half of Ohio to the United States. In 1794, 
the British signed the Jay Treaty, giving up their North- 
west posts (see Jay Tre.\t\')- Pinckney's Treaty of 1795 
settled a conflict with Spain in the Southwest. This 
treaty gave westerners the right to send their products 
down the Mississippi River for export. 

These military and diplomatic tritmiphs brought 
peace to the frontier after 1 795 and launched one of the 
greatest westward migrations in history. During two 
months in 1795, more than 25,000 people crossed the 
Cumberland River into western Tennessee. The tide 
of newcomers became so great that Kentucky achieved 
statehood in 1792 and Tennessee in 1796. Far to the 
north. New Englanders flooded into western New \'ork 
after the Iroquois Indians were forced out. Other settlers 
pushed into the Ohio lands opened by the Treaty of 
Greenville. They bought land from the government or 
from the Ohio Company, a New England land-speculat- 
ing firm that had obtained title to much of the Musking- 
um \'aliey (see Ohio Company). Marietta, Ohio, 
founded in 1 788. became the first seat of government in 
the Northwest Territory. Ohio became a state- in 1803, 

206 



and the stream of setders flowed steadily west\vard. 
New Indian wars halted the westward-flowing tide in 
1808 and 1809. Led by the Shawnee chief Tecumseh, 
the Indians struck back against the frontiersmen who 
were seizing their hunting grounds in the Mid\\est (see 
Tecumseh). The Indian warfare soon merged into a 
larger struggle, the War of 181 2. This war gave the 
westerners an opportunity to win two important victo- 
ries over the Indians. Tecumseh was killed in the first, 
the Battle of the Thames, in 1813. In the second, the 
Battle of Horseshoe Bend, in 1814, a militia force under 
General Andrew Jackson defeated the Creek Indians of 
Georgia. The Indians then surrendered most of their 
lands east of Alabama without further struggle. 

Settling the Midwest and South, 1815-1840 

The "Great Migration" to the frontier that began 
after the War of 181 2 was more spectacular than all 
those that had gone before. Within five years after the 
war ended in 181 5, about 1.250,000 persons had built 
new homes in the level lands near the Great Lakes or 
on the Gulf Plains bordering the Gulf of Mexico. 

The Old Northwest. In the years just aftei the War of 
181 2, thousands of newcomers established small farms 
in the Northwest Territory, called the Old .Korthwest. 
Most of these people came from the South, where the 
growth of plantauons had driven them out. By 1830, 
their settlements filled southern Indiana and Illinois, 
and they were overrunning Missouri beyond the Mis- 
sissippi River. After that time, most newcomers came 
from the Northeast and settled around the Great Lakes. 
Bv 1836, Detroit had grown into a sizable community, 
with many schools and churches, a theater, a museum, 
and a public garden. The opening of the Erie Canal 
in 1825 gave settlers a convenient and inexpensi\'e way 



Prospectors at Their "Diggings" looked 
for gold in and near streams. A day's "washing" 
might yield as much as $500. But hundreds of men 
returned home with little to show for their labor. 




William A. Crort, Pioneers in the Settlement of America, 1876 



to move west. At the same time, the canal started the 
"rural decay" of New England. Farmers on the hilly 
fields of New England and New York found they could 
not compete with farmers on the fertile plains around 
the Great Lakes. Many of them sold out or simply 
abandoned their farms, and moved west. Others moved 
to the growing cities nearby. By 1840 almost all the Old 
Northwest had been carved into states. See Erie Canal. 
The Gulf Plains and Florida. During this period, pio- 
neers were also moving into the newly acquired terri- 
tory of Florida. Another stream of settlers began pouring 
into the land bordering the Gulf of Mexico, known as 
the Old Southwest. These pioneers came ahnost entirely 
from the Southeast, and all had one ambition — to find 
good fields where they could grow cotton. Western 
Georgia was occupied first. Then, as the government 
uprooted Indian tribes from Alabama and Mississippi, 
these states were quicklv overrun. The area around 
Natchez, Miss., had 75,000 persons by 1820. Small 
farmers led the rush, as they had in the Old Northwest. 
Following them came planters who brought slaves and 
money in the hope of buying good cotton land. Their 
plantations soon blanketed the best soil of the entire 
Gulf Plains region. The small farmers were doomed to 
poorer lands. By 1840, settlers had occupied the entire 
area, and frontiersmen were already pushing beyond the 
Mississippi to begin the conquest of the Far West. 
Behind them, they left the roaring life of river-boat 
gamblers, outlaws, and adventurers who moved be- 
tween Natchez and New Orleans. 

Beyond the Mississippi, 1803-1840 

Exploration. When President Thomas Jefferson 
bought Louisiana from France in 1803, he focused 
.'\merican attention on tlie territory beyond the Missis- 



sippi River (see Louisi.\na Purchase). Jefferson was 
curious about the vast area he had purchased in one of 
the greatest real-estate bargains in history. He sent a 
number of exploring expeditions westward. Most im- 
portant was the Lewis and Clark expedition. Between 
1804 and 1805, Meriwether Lewis and William Clark 
followed the Missouri River to its source, crossed the 
continental divide, and reached the Pacific Ocean at 
the mouth of the Columbia River. Zebulon M. Pike, 
who set out in 1806 to explore southern Louisiana, was 
less successful. A Mexican army captured his expedi- 
tion near the headwaters of the Rio Grande River in 
Mexico and drove the explorers back across the border. 
The War of 1812 stopped exploration until 1820, when 
Major Stephen H. Long investigated the lands near the 
Red and Arkansas rivers. He called the whole Great 
Plains region "the Great American Desert," and 
branded it unfit for occupation. 

Far to the north, Canadian explorers also pushed 
westward. Sir Alexander Mackenzie, Simon Eraser, and 
David Thompson led expeditions to the Pacific Coast 
in the late I700's and early I800's. In 1812, Scottish 
immigrants under Lord Selkirk founded the Red River 
Colony in Manitoba. But Canada's west did not attract 
heavy settlement for many years. 

The true explorers of the West were traders and fur 
trappers, not government or company agents. In 1821, 
adventurous traders opened the Santa F'e route between 
New Mexico and Missouri. Fur trappers were even more 
important than traders in the conquest of the West. 
These far-roaming "mountain men" began trapping 
beavers and other animals in the Rocky Moimtain 
country in the mid-l820"s. Some trading companies 
sent exploring parties to search for untrapped streams. 
Jedediah Smith, who led two expeditions to the Pacific 



207 



SIXTSUSNTH JLSKJJAS^ CIBCXjr.A.R. 

imm ROBES! 

HART, TAYLOR &amp; CO. 



BOST* OI«T. 



JTTX*»". 



OOIJ-BC-T-IOX *&gt;K 

3 X1.0^ 



1876. 



UDLIMED ROBCa. 

■». 1 fclianlMi, 8»w«&lt;&gt; Bol&gt;««. 



- XXwhaf 



lecx) 
soo 

7.00 
tt.00 

loto 
».oo 

8.00 



o»a. MconUns to tiM, 4.00 to e!oo 

SoUTwSS. UKl Ml Boii~. H.00 to Hi 00 



UMED BUFFALO ROBES. 

Medium ftod SmftU Lln«d BaBOo. te. uid 98.0O 

Uaod U.00 

■ X •• - U.00 

11.60 

. U.00 

ig.eo 

00 to 34.00 



XxtnLlood Robes. 



BUFFAUI OOAT*. 

BoShlo OvwtMata, Bu«U&amp; Tttenia^^ CIA.&amp;O 

Nntri*. IB.OO 

- [iM'tf Otllaf. 16.80 

■• BcsTCf &lt; ojlw .nd FkR&gt;«:&gt;. IB.bO 

• L^Vtli sad QooUtj. tLOO to &amp;.0O Kztf*. 



WOLF AND OTHER PUR ROBCB. 



Black Boor Boboo. 



WolTorlfio. 
Beo v o i , 
Boocoon. 
Oeoet. 



•$S.OO to 9100-00 
35.00 
40.00 to 
6O.0O •■ 



- Juoa« 
BndooQ 



toao ~ Wolf Boboo. 



le.oo ■ 

13.00 
30 00 • 

ssoo - 



•BOO to 4&lt;00 
7B-00 *■ 100.00 



Pnlrto Woir. 



7S-00 
80.0O 
90 00 
3O0O 
3S00 
40.00 
SB.OO 

as. 00 

3100 



CAMIIAOE ROBES, Ac. 

lupofted Lomb't Wool. 913.00 to IIB.OO 

CkOBlBo. B.50 " 8.00 

^ bn'&gt; ■*] danbtr. 4.00 to 4.60 



HORSE SQUARE BLAMKETS. 

XX PUw Koney. r7.00. eOO ond 9-O0 

New BoiapoUro. 



HimtlBsta» MlBo. "^^ -&gt;'" 
WUtoPlold, Wow j e mj i hlr o. 



1. 3b 

LSb 

LfiO to L7fi 

ibO 





Americans Tamed the "Last West" with 
ruthless energy. In the 1 870's, they slaugh- 
tered millions of buffalo for food, fur, or 
"sport." Indians, deprived of their liveli- 
hood, fought whites with desperate savagery. 



Thf New York Historical Society 



Coast, probabh' saw more unexplored territor\" than any 
other Americans e.xcept Lewis and Clark. By the be- 
ginning of the 1840's, most of the beaver had been 
killed. But, at the same time, the mountain men had 
investigated almost every nook and cranny of die Far 
West. They spread word everywhere of the riches in the 
area. 

The news came at a time when restiess pioneers were 
already looking for new lands. The fanning frontier at 
this time stopped just beyond the first states west of the 
Mississippi River. This area had filled up rapidly. 
Missouri achieved statehood in 1821, and Arkansas in 
1836. Iowa received thousands of setders after Indian 
lands there were opened in 1833. Beyond these states 
lay the Great Plains, still known at the time as "the 
Great American Desert." This giant grassland lacked 
timber for fuel, fences, and homes. The dry climate did 
not look promising for growing crops. The area also 
included a number of Indian reservations, where the 
government had only recently setded many tribes. 
There seemed to be no way to get past this barrier, yet 
frontiersmen were eager to be on the move. 

The Southwest. .Some pioneers went southward. Be- 
ginning in 1 82 1 , great caravans of covered wagons 
plodded across the plains to Santa Fe, loaded with goods 
to be traded for Mexican gold and silver. The Santa Fe 
traders learned how to travel on the plains, and taught 
later pioneers how to travel. They also speeded expan- 
sion into the Southwest when they reported that Mexico 
had only a weak hold on the region. See S.\nt.^ Fe 
Tr.ail. 

But Texas attracted most of the permanent settlers. 
This Mexican province was opened to .Americans in the 
1820's, largely through the efforts of Stephen F. .Austin. 
By 1830, around 20,000 setders had moved- into the 

208 



area. Conflicts with Mexican officials followed when 
.American pioneers began to outnumber the Mexicans. 
These conflicts grew into a revolution in 1836. The 
Texans under Sam Houston won the Batde of San 
Jacinto, and the Republic of Texas was born. 

Settling the For West, 1840-1860 

Frontiersmen soon heard of rich valleys lying far to 
the west — the Sacramento and San Joaquin valleys of 
California and the Willamette and Puget Sound valleys 
of the Oregon countrv". The news came from fur traders, 
from merchants who carried on a thriving sea trade with 
Spanish mission stations in California, and from mis- 
sionaries, who had begun their work in Oregon as early 
as 1834. 

The first major caravans of covered wagons creaked 
over the Oregon and California trails in 1843. For many 
years after that, hundreds of eager adventurers gathered 
at Independence, Mo., every spring to organize cara- 
vans. They pushed westward along dre Platte River, 
over the Rocky Mountains through South Pass, and 
northward to the Snake River. There, some followed 
the Snake and Columbia rivers to the Oregon countr)'. 
Others turned southward across the dusty deserts of 
Utah and Nevada to the Sierra Nevada mountains. 
They scaled the mountains, suffering incredible hard- 
ships, and arrived at .Sutter's Fort (no\v Sacramento) in 
California. By 1840, about 5,000 .Americans lived in 
the Oregon country, and nearly i ,000 in California. See 
Oregon Trail. 

This movement had important results. For many 
years, Great Britain had contested .American claims to 
the Oregon country. Its Hudson's Ba\' Compan)- con- 
trolled the region. But the trading compan\' feared the 
newcomers and hurriedly pulled out. Britain surrendered 



(i 



*■■■*: 




The End of the Frontier in 1890 brought to a close the era 
of western expansion. Civilization, in the form of telegraph 



The Taft Museum, Cincinnati 

wires, hod come even to the desert. In Henry Farny's painting, 
a bewildered Indian listens to The Song of the Tatking Wire. 



the whole area south of the 49th parallel to the United 
States in the Oregon Treaty of 1846. That same year, 
American frontiersmen in California launched the Bear 
Flag Rebellion against their Mexican rulers. This out- 
break soon became part of the Mexican War. The 
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ended the war. It gave 
the United States not only California but also the entire 
Southwest. The United States now stretched from sea 
to sea, with vast new lands open for settlement. 

Utah. The first settlers to arrive were not profit-seeking 
adventurers, but a band of devoted men and women 
hunting an isolated spot where they could worship their 
God as they pleased. The Mormons had been perse- 
cuted in New York, Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois before 
they followed Brigham Young westward. The migra- 
tion that brought them to the shores of Utah's Great 
Salt Lake in 1847 was one of the best organized in his- 
tory. Their conquest of the desert was just as well 
planned. The Mormons used cooperative techniques 
unique in frontier history'. They fenced fields, built irri- 
gation ditches, and laid out Salt Lake City. In a re- 
markably short time, they established a prosperous 
community. See Mormons (History of the Church). 

California. The early trickle of migration into the Far 
West swelled to a torrent when workmen building a 
mill near Sacramento discovered gold in the American 
River early in 1848. At first, the rush attracted only 
Californians, Mexicans, and Oregonians. But when 
President James K. Polk discussed the discovery in his 
message to Congress in December, 1848, gold fever 
swept the nation. More than 100,000 "Forty-Niners" 
poured into California. In their camps — given such 
picturesque names as Poker Flat, Hangtown, and 
Skunk Gulch — rooms rented for Si, 000 a month, and 
eggs cost $10 a dozen. Relatively few miners actually 



found gold, but many others settled down as farmers 
and shopkeepers. California became a state in 1850. 

The Last Frontiers, 1860-1890 

Much of the West remained unsettled even after the 
frontier reached the Pacific Ocean. But during the 
Civil War, pioneers settled in the mountain and basin 
region between the Rocky Mountains and the Sierras. 
In tlie years after the war, cattlemen and farmers occu- 
pied the Great Plains. New railroads helped bring an 
end to the frontier. In the LInited States, the Union 
Pacific and Central Pacific lines met in 1869 to form the 
first transcontinental railroad. The Canadian Pacific 
Railway first crossed Canada in 1885. 

Mining Towns. Most of the frontiersmen who con- 
quered the mountains and deserts of the Far West were 
disappointed Forty-Niners. They moved eastward from 
California in the years after 1855, prospecting for pre- 
cious metals everywhere. Some spread out over the 
Southwest, hoping to "strike it rich" in Arizona and 
Nevada. Others turned northward to find "pay dirt" in 
Idaho, Montana, and British Columbia. Still more 
searched for gold in the Rockies and in the Black Hills 
region of South Dakota. Wherever the miners went, 
farmers and merchants followed. 

Ranches and Homesteads. By the middle i86o's, the 
Great Plains countr\' was the only region in die United 
States that remained unsettled. Soon after the Civil 
War, Texas catdemen began driving their herds north- 
ward to the railroads that crossed Kansas and Nebraska, 
so that the cattle could be shipped eastward. Almost 
overnight, the whole region became a giant pasture. 
But the day of "the cattle kingdom" was brief. The 
Homestead Act of 1862 encouraged farmers to move in 
from the East. As they followed the railroads westward, 



209 



WESTWARD MOVEMENT 

the farmers took over the land, fenced it in, and barred 
the roving cattle herds. By 1890, the frontier was no 
more. Some areas, such as Oklahoma, had land rushes 
after this date, but the pioneers had conquered the West. 
Many adventurers went be\-ond the country's boimd- 
aries in search of new lands and opportunities. Some 
went to .Maska in the Klondike Gold Rush of 1896. 
Others looked for wealth in Hawaii. Puerto Rico, or the 
Philippines. But there was no rtish comparable to the 
great migrations of the iBoo's. Instead, more than 
1,000,000 .\mericans homesteaded in the Prairie Prov- 
inces of Canada. Here, about 1 920. frontier expansion 
on the American continent came to a close. 

Causes and Effects 

Why Men Went West. Opportunity drew men west- 
ward to the rich farm and pasture lands beyond settled 
areas. Some people left their homes in the East when 
their farm lands wore thin. Others wanted elbowroom 
that they could not have in what they thought were 
crowded Eastern communities. In the middle lyoo's, a 
Connecticut farmer wrote that "many are inclined to 
Remove to new Places . . . that they may have more 
Room, thinking that we live too thick." Still others 
moved westward because they were driven by a desire 
for adventure, a change of scene, or "a strong bent of 
their spirits for change." 

Patterns of Settlement. Tlic westward movement 
followed a set pattern. \Vlicne\er times were good and 
attractive lands lav ahead, there was a rush to the fron- 
tier. OccasionalK- the inoscment halted when the pio- 
neers met some obstacle. This might be a mountain 
barrier or natural condition unfamiliar to them, sttch as 
the prairies of Indiana and Illinois or the Great Plains 
farther west. More often. Indian uprisings checked their 
march. Each time the settlers advanced, they took more 
land from these "First .Americans." The Indians were 
finally driven to the warpath to protect their hunting 
grounds (see Indi.^n Wars). While fighting raged, mi- 
gration slowed down. As soon as the frontier became 
peaceful again, a ne\s' rush westward began. 

Growth of Communities. The constant movement 
west\vard meant that for more than 200 years societ\- 
was being created again and again on the frontier. The 
pioneers soon found that many of the ideas and habits 
they brought with them did not work in the wilderness. 
The pioneers did not need a complicated government 
and many government services. They did not need 
social classes or cultural interests such as theaters and 
libraries. They needed most of their energy to battle 
nature on their farms. So frontier communities foimd 
easier ways of doing things. Groups of settlers governed 
themselves. Each man made all the things he needed, 
or else did without them. Barn dances and corn-husking 
bees replaced more elaborate entertainment. Children 
learned little more from books than how to read, write, 
and work simple arithmetic problems. 

GradualK'. as newcomers arrived, society began to 
grow more complicated. Established governments de- 
veloped. Men began to specialize in one kind of work. 
Schools and literary societies blossomed to satisfy the 
growing thirst for culture. Social classes began to ap- 
pear. Eventuallv the frontier communities became fully 



developed, but they diflered from those in the East. 

Each community developed separately, in its own 
area. The people who settled it, and the area they 
settled, both affected the growth of the community. As 
a result, frontiersmen developed an ".American" way of 
life that was different from what they had known before. 

Contributions of the Frontier. Certain traits and ways 
of life became so rooted in the national character that 
they lasted long after the frontier itself had disappeared. 
Frontiersmen constantly had to invent new gadgets and 
techniques to solve imfamiliar problems. People in the 
United States are still noted for their inventiveness and 
their willingness to experiment. The early settlers were 
strongly individualistic, and "rugged individualism" is 
still a national trait. The frontiersmen developed a deep 
faith in democracy. A man's ability to overcome the 
problems of the frontier mattered more than his family's 
position. As the people faced common hardships in the 
tmtamed West, they developed the idea that they were 
all more or less equal. The .American faith in demo- 
cratic principles o\\'es a great deal to this frontier heritage. 

The westward movement influenced United States 
history in other ways. It stimulated nationalism. Settlers 
in western communities came from many backgrounds. 
It was easier for them to become "Americans," with a 
new pride in a new country, than to remain loyal to the 
various homelands they had left behind them. Western 
expansion also promoted a strong central government. 
'Fhe frontier presented complex problems, such as build- 
ing roads and controlling the Indians. These problems 
could be solved only by a federal government. 

Europe, too, felt the influence of the westward move- 
ment. NIanv Europeans were attracted to the United 
States bv accoimts they read of life in the new west, and 
by the efforts of railroad lines and steamship companies 
to encourage immigration. 

Men Who Led the Way 

The Frontier Process is easier to understand if we do 
not consider the frontier as a line separating the settled 
and unsettled portions of the continent. The frontier 
was really a series of westward-moving areas. Each area 
represented a different stage in the growth of American 
civilization. In the zone farthest from settlements, fur 
trappers and traders roamed. These adventurers made 
no attempt to tame the wilderness. They explored it and 
prepared the way for others. Miners also ventured be- 
vond the farming frontier whenever someone discovered 
deposits of gold, silver, or lead. Next came the cattle- 
men, seeking pastures where their herds could roam 
freely without being restricted by farmers' fences. ^Vc 
think today of cowboys tending great herds of cattle 
only in the Far West. But bellowing herds were a famil- 
iar sight in the \"irginia back country of the i6oo's and 
on the prairies of Illinois in the early iSoo's. 

The trappers, miners, and cattlemen were usually 
followed by pioneer farmers. Many of these first farmers 
were restless drifters who used the land but did not own 
it. These squatters built crude log cabins and cleared 
a few fields. They might acquire title to the land 
through squatter's rights (see Squ.\tter's Rights). Some 
pulled out as more people moved in. They usually sold 
their properrs- to farmers who had some money and am- 
bition, and wanted to settle down. Such a newcomer 
cleared away more of the forest, built a permanent 



210 



home, hacked out split-rail fences, and worked on roads 
to connect his farm with nearby markets. Still another 
sroup had to arrive before the frontier process was com- 
plete. These were the merchants, millers, doctors, law- 
yers, and many other men who provided all the services 
of a fully developed community. 

As the frontier moved west^vard, it left behind a 
setded area. This in turn contributed to the stream of 
settlers already moving into the newer "West" beyond. 

Leaders and Promoters. The way westward was pio- 
neered by thousands of unknown frontiersmen. But, 
now and then, born leaders shaped the course of the 
movement. Daniel Boone, Jim Bridger, and others 
found happiness only in solitude. They were less con- 
cerned with finding new homes for their fellow men than 
in escaping the restraints of society. Some leaders 
wanted to build a better place for others to live in. 
Brigham Young led the Mormons to the shores of Great 
Salt Lake because he believed they could live their ow n 
lives there. Still others obeyed their God or their con- 
sciences as they braved the wilderness. Thomas Hooker 
heard such a call when he gathered his Cambridge con- 
gregation for the march to the Clonnecticut N'alley in 
1636. So did Father De Smet, Jason Lee, and Marcus 
Whitman when they ventured into the western wilder- 
ness 200 years later to convert the Indians toChristianit\'. 

But the vast majority of frontier leaders were practical 
men who wanted onl&gt;- to improve their lives by moving 
CO a land of greater opportunity. John Sevier and James 
Robertson had such ambitions as they paved the way 
into Tennessee just before the Revolutionary War. So 
did Rufus Putnam when he created the Ohio Company, 
and John Bidwell when he formed the first wagon train 
for the cross-country march to California. The men who 
led the way westward were drawn from every back- 
ground and driven by almost everv' ambition. They had 
only one thing in common — a bold faith in their own 
ability to conquer the wilderness and find what they 
were seeking. Ray .alle.n billington 

Related Articles. .See the History sections of the various 
state articles, such as Tex.^s (History). .See also the 
following articles: 

Le.aders of the \S'estw.\rd Movement 
Austin Lee, Jason 

Boone, Daniel Lewis, Meriwether 

Bridger, James Mackenzie, Sir .\lexander 

Carson, "Kit," Christopher McLoughlin, John 
Chouteau Pike, Zebulon Montgomery 

Clark, George Rogers Putnam, Rufus 

Clark, William Sevier, Jolm 

Colter, John Smith, Jedediah Strong 

Crockett, Da\ id Sublette, William Lewis 

Fargo, William Thompson, David 

Fremont, John Charles Whitman, Marcus 

Gist, Christopher Young, Brigham 

Houston, Samuel 

Other Rel.-iiTed Articles 
Astoria Mexican War 

Colonial Life in .\merica North West Company 

Forty-Niner Northwest Ordinance 

Franklin, State of Northwest Territory 

French and Indian Wars Ohio Company 

Gold Rush Pioneer Life 

Homestead Act Public Lands 

Hudson's Bay Company .Scout 

Indian Wars Trails of Early Days 

Lewis and Clark Expedition Watauga Association 

Louisiana Purchase VSestern Frontier Life 



WEYMOUTH 

Outline 
I. The First Frontiers 
II. Across the Mountains, 1763-1815 

III. Settling the Midwest and South, 1815-1840 

IV. Beyond the Mississippi, 1803-1840 
V. Settling the Far West, 1840-1860 

VI. The Last Frontiers, 1860-1890 
VII. Causes and Effects 
VIM. Men Who Led the Way 

Questions 

Who were "the mountain men"? 

What were the Ordinances of 1785 and 1787? 

What .American qualities arose on the frontier? 

How did the War of 1812 affect westward migration? 

What routes did caravans follow to Oregon and 
California? 

Why was the Erie Canal important to both the East 
and the West? 

Whydid pioneers at first avoid settling the Plains? 

What types of people were the first to move West? 

What event in 1848 led to the rapid development of 
California? 

Why did men like Daniel Boone go west? 

WET MILLING. See Corn (Milling). 

WETHERED, JOYCE. See Golf (Golf Immortals). 

WETTIN. See Windsor (family); S.^xony. 

WEYDEN, ROGER VAN DER. See Van der Weyden, 
Roger. 

WEYGAND, VAY GAHN, MAXIME (1867-1965), a 
French soldier, served as chief of staflT to Marshal Ferdi- 
nand Foch during World War I. In 1920 and 1921, he 
was military adviser to the Polish government during 
the Russo-Polish War, and helped the Poles defeat the 
Russian Bolsheviks. He was chief of the French General 
Staflffrom 1930 to 1935. 

During the German invasion of France in World War 
II, Weygand was brought from the Middle East to com- 
mand the French army. But he could not prevent the 
French defeat. He served the \'ichy government, first 
as minister of war and later as commissioner in North 
.\frica. He would not join widi the ."Mlied invasion forces 
in 1 942, but was suspected by the Germans. They later 
recalled him and held him prisoner until 1945. After the 
war, Weygand was charged with collaborating widi the 
Germans, but in 1948 a French court found him not 
guilty. He was born in Brussels, Belgium, and entered 
the French army in 1888. E. j. Knapton 

WEYLER Y NICOLAU, WAY ler ee nee koh LAH oo, 
VALERIANO (1838-1930), M.A.RqLis of Te.xerife, a 
Spanish general, was appointed governor of Cuba in 
1896. His cruel methods aroused such a storm of protest 
in the United States that the Spanish government re- 
called him in 1897. Weyler put down revolts in Cuba in 
1868, fought in Spain against Spanish rebels known as 
Cartists, and served as Minister of War. Weyler was born 
on the island of Majorca. j. Gary Da\is 

WEYMOUTH, Mass. (pop. 48,177; alt. 89 ft.), is on an 
inlet of Massachusetts Bay, about 10 miles southeast of 
Boston. Industries in Weymouth produce shoes, fer- 
tilizer, and electrical equipment. The .Abigail Adams 
House, birthplace of the wife of President John Adams, 
still stands in Weymouth. The town was founded in 
1622, and incorporated in 1635. Weymouth claims it 
originated the New England town meeting form of 
government (see Town Meeting). For location, see 
Massachusetts (political map). 



211 




WHALE 



by Don Rodell for WORLD BOOK 



WHALE is the largest animal that has ever lived. 
Whales are much bigger than elephants or even the 
prehistoric dinosaurs. The largest kind of whale, the 
blue whale, may grow 95 feet long and weigh 1 50 tons 
(300,000 pounds). A newborn blue whale may be 23 
feet long and weigh 3 tons. 

Whales live in the oceans and look much like fish. 
But they are not fish. Whales are mammals, as are dogs, 
cats, horses, and human beings. 

There are many differences between whales and fish. 
The most easily seen difference is their tails. Whales 
have horizontal tail fins, and fish have vertical tail 
fins. Whales, like other mammals, bear their young 
alive. Their babies nurse on the mother's mUk. Whales 
breathe through lungs and must hold their breath 
when they go under water. They will drown if they 
are trapped under water and cannot reach the sur- 
face in time to breathe fresh air. Whales are warm- 
blooded — their blood always stays at the same temper- 
ature. A thick layer of fat called blubber keeps them 
warm even in cold water. On the other hand, fish 
lay eggs and breathe oxygen from the water through 
gills. Fish are cold-blooded — die temperature of their 
blood changes with the temperature of the water. 

A whale is different from other mammals in several 
ways. Most mammals have hair on their bodies. A 
whale has only a few crinkly hairs on its head. Unlike 



Raymond M. Gilmore^ the contributor oj this article, is 
Research Associate, Marine Mammals, at the Museum of 
Natural History in San Diego, Calif., and Assistant Professor 
of Biology at California Western University. 



other mammals, a whale has no sense of smell. It can 
hear well, even though it has only tiny ear openings 
and no ears on the outside of its body. Other mammals 
have four limbs, two in front and two in back. The 
whale's two front limbs are flippers that look much 
like paddles. All that remain of what were once the 
whale's hind limbs are two small bones buried in its 
hip muscles. 

Men have hunted whales for thousands of years. In 
the early days, daring whalers in small boats har- 
pooned the huge beasts by hand. A whale often pulled 
the men for miles as it struggled to get free. Some- 
times it smashed the boat with its huge tail. Today, 
whalers use powerful guns to shoot explosive harpoons. 
.A bomb attached to the harpoon explodes inside the 
whale's body and kills the animal instantly. Most of 
the danger of whaling has gone. 

Whale oil once was important as a fuel for lamps 
and cooking. But the value of whale products has fallen 
through the years. Today, whale oil is used chiefly 
in Europe to make margarine. Manufacturers of explo- 
sives use glycerine from whale oil. Whale oil also goes 
into some laundry soaps and has other industrial uses. 
Whale meat is used as food for dogs, cats, and minks. 
It is an important human food in Japan and Noi^way. 
The bones and other parts of the whale are cooked, 
dried, and ground into meal for use as livestock feed and 
as fertilizer. 

One kind of whale, the sperm whale, provides three 
valuable materials. Spermaceti is used in some salves 
and face creams. Sperm oil is used to lubricate machinery 
and to soften leather. Ambergris is used in making ex- 
pensive perfumes. See Spermaceti; Ambergris. 

213 



KINDS OF WHALES 

There are two main types of whales: (1) whales that 
have teeth, and (2) whales that do not have teeth. 

Toothed Whales have peglike teeth that vary in 
number. The sperm whale has from 36 to 56 teeth, 
all in the lower jaw. Some other kinds of toothed 
whales have only 2 or 4 teeth, also in the lower jaw 
only. Most kinds of male toothed whales are larger 
than the females. Dolphins and porpoises also have 
peglike teeth. .Scientists classify them and toothed 
whales in the suborder of mammals called Odontoceli. 

Baleen Whales have no teeth. They have horny 
plates in their mouths that strain out their food from 
the water. These plates are called baleen or whalebone. 
The baleen hangs in two rows, like curtains, one on 
each side of the whale's upper jaw. The inner edges 
of the plates have a fringe of bristles that strain out 
food. Female baleen whales are larger than the males. 
Baleen whales with grooves on their throats and chests, 
and a small fin on their backs, are called rorquals. 
Baleen whales make up the suborder of mammals 
called Mysticeti. 





All illustrations on these two pages are 
to the some scale: 1 inch = about 1 



drown 
6 feet. 



BLUE or SULFUR-BOTTOM. Maximum length and 
weight, 95 feet (many claimed over 100 feet) — 150 
tons. Characteristics, the largest and fastest-swimming 
whale. Bluish except for yellow (sulfur color) on 
underside, caused by coating of diatoms (tiny water 
plants). Black baleen. Rorqual. Found in all oceans 



CHIEF KINDS OF 





The Largest Dinosaur, along with 
an elephant and a man, could stand 
on a blue whale with plenty of 
room to spare. 



SEI. Maximum length and weight, 55 feet — 40 
tons. Characteristics, looks much like finback, 
but no white patch on jaw. Prominent fin. 
Dark back, light underside. Gray baleen 
with some white; fringe of fibers soft and 
silky. Rorqual. Found in all oceans. 




BOTTLE-NOSED. Maxi- 
mum length and weight, 30 
feet — 10 tons. Character- 
istics, forehead of male 
has flat swelling. Four 
teeth. Dark. Found in 
North Adantic and Ant- 
arctic regions. 



GIANT BOTTLE-NOSED. 

Maximum length and weight, 
42 feet — 30 tons. Charac- 
teristics, snout narrows 
into round "beak," like 
the neck of a bottle. Four 
teeth. Black or dark gray. 
Found in North Pacific 
and Antarctic regions. 



CHIEF KINDS OF 




KILLER (a large porpoise). 
Maxinnun length and weight, 
30 feet — 10 tons. Charac- 
teristics, 40-48 teeth. Glossy 
black back, white under- 
side. Found in all oceans. 



FINBACK. Maximum hnglh and u;ight, 82 feet— 100 
tons. Characteristics, prominent fin. Slender body. 
Gray-black back, white underside, white patch on 
front of right upper jaw. White and gray baleen. 
Rorqual. Found in all oceans. 



GRAY. Maximum length and weight, 50 
feet — 40 tons. Characteristics, has low 
ridge in place of fin. Dark gray or 
black, with many white spots. Many 
barnacles on head. White baleen. 
Found in North Pacific region. 





BALEEN WHALES 




PYGMY RIGHT. Maximum length 
and zceight, 20-25 feet — 3-4 tons. 
Characteristics, smallest baleen 
whale. Has 17 pairs of ribs, com- 
pared with 13-15 pairs in most 
other whales. Dark. .Short baleen. 
Found near Antarctica. 



HUMPBACK. Maximum length and weight, 50 feet— 
45 tons. Characteristics, humplike roll of fat on back. 
Many "whale lice" (barnacles and crustaceans) on 
body. Large flippers, 12-13 feet long. Dark, with white 
patches on underside. Black baleen. Rorqual. Found 
in all oceans. 




P 




RIGHT. Maximum length and weight. 

Characteristics, horny "bonnet" 

licad. Short, broad flippers. Black with long, narrow, 

black baleen. Divided spout. Found in all oceans. 



ARCTIC RIGHT or BOWHEAD. Maximum length 
and weight, 55 feet — 45 tons. Characteristics, has 
longer baleen (up to 12 feet long) than any 
other whale. Looks much like right whale, but 
no "bonnet" on snout. Black with narrow, black 
baleen. Divided spout. Found in Arctic. 



PYGMY FINNER. Maximum length and weight, 
35 feet — 12 tons. Characteristics, dark back, 
light underside. White band across flipper. 
Prominent fin. Yellowish baleen. Rorqual. 
Found in all oceans. 




by Tom Dolan for WORLD BOOK 



TOOTHED WHALES 



NARWHAL. Maximum length and 
weight, 18 feet — 2 tons. Character- 
istics, male has spiral ivory tusk 
about 8 feet long jutting from left 
side of head. Female has no tusk. 
Gray-white, with dark gray or 
black spots. Found in Arctic region. 



SPERM. Maximum length and weight, 65 feet— 60 tons. 
Characteristics, largest toothed whale, with 36-56 cone- 
shaped teeth in lower jaw. Enormous head makes up 
third of body length. Head contains "reservoir" of 
spermaceti. Dark gray. Found in all oceans. 




The Skeleton of a Blue Whale makes 
up only about 17 per cent of the anima 
weight, much less than the skeleton of a 
land mammal. The water helps support the 
whale's body, but the bones of a land 
mammal must carry its entire weight. 



UPPER JAW 



SKULL - 



BACKBONE 




The Shape of a Whale's Spout Helps Identify the Whole. right whole, cenfer, is divided. The sperm whale^ right, hasa 
The spout of the blue whale, left, is tall and thick. The spout of the low spout that shoots forward and upward. 




The Tail Helps Tell Whales from Fish. Whales 
have horizontal tails. Fish have vertical toils. 





A Mother Whale Nurses Its Baby Under 
Woter. The female whole has special breast muscles 
that pump milk into the baby's mouth. The baby, called 
a calf, drinks its mother's milk for about six months. 



by Tom Dolan for WORLD BOOK 



Life off the Whale 



Whales live in all the oceans. Every summer, many 
kinds of whales migrate (travel) to cold waters to feed. 
In winter, some swim to warmer waters to breed. 
Some kinds, including sperm whales, live in groups of 
several hundred animals. These groups are called 
herds, schools, or pods. Other kinds, such as gray whales, 
live in small family groups of two or three animals. 

Female baleen whales carry their young inside their 
bodies for 12 months before they are born. Sperm wliales 
carry their young for 18 months. The mother whale al- 
most always has one baby at a time. Twins are rare. 
A female whale is called a cow, a male is called a 
bull, and a baby whale is called a calf. 

214b 



Whales have only one enemy other than man. This is 
the killer whale, a type of porpoise (see Killer Whale). 
Whales apparently do not fight among themselves. 
They seldom attack a boat unless they have been 
wounded. Most whales live from 20 to 30 years. 

Swimming and Diving. Whales swim and dive most 
of the time. Their eyes give off" an oily substance that 
protects them from the salty ocean water. Whales de- 
pend on their sense of hearing more than on their 
sight. Sound travels faster through water than through 
air, and whales have good hearing. Whales sleep by 
napping at the surface of the water for a few minutes 
at a time. 



Swimming. The \\hale swims with up-and-down 
pushes of its powerful flitkcs (tail fins). It uses its paddle- 
like flippers for turning and balancing. Most whales 
swim at a speed of 3 to 5 miles an hour. Blue whales, 
the swiftest kind, can swim as fast as 25 mph. 

A whale suffocates on land, even though it breathes 
air. It needs the \\ater to support its huge body. If 
a whale is stranded on the shore, the great weight of its 
body presses down on its lungs. 

Diving. .Some toothed whales sound (dive) to great 
depths in their search for food. One sperm whale 
drowned when it got snarled in a telegraph cable at 
a depth of 3,720 feet. Baleen whales dive only about 
500 feet. Sperm whales stay under water from 45 min- 
utes to an hour. Most baleen whales stay down only 
from 5 to 10 minutes. 

\Vhen a whale goes under water, it holds its breath. 
The air in its lungs becomes hot and full of moisture. 
When the whale reaches die surface, it blows (blows 
out its breath). The hot breath strikes the colder outside 
air and condenses, fonning a spout (column) of fog. .-\ 
baleen whale has two blowholts (nostrils) on top of its 
head. A toothed whale has one blowhole. 



WHALE 

A whaler can tell one kind of whale from another at 
a distance by watching the spouts. For example, the 
blue whale has a tall, thick spout. This whale blows 
from three to eight times in quick succession. The 
sperm whale has a low spout that shoots forward and 
upward. It blows from 15 to 30 times. 

Eating. The larger whales probably eat from i to li 
tons of food every day. 

Toothed Whales eat fish and squids (see .Solid). 
They can hold their prey easily in their peglike teetli. 
But they swallow their food without chewing it. .'\ 
large sperm whale could probabh' swallow a man. But 
a man could not live in a whale's stomach for more 
dian a few seconds, e\'en if he had not already been 
crushed to death. 

Baleen Whales eat mo%l\\ plankton (small sea animals 
and plants). When the whale approaches a mass of 
plankton, it opens its mouth and swims into its dinner. 
.'\s the whale closes its mouth, its tongue squeezes out 
the water. The plankton remains on the baleen, and 
the whale swallows it. Baleen whales also eat small fish. 



Whaling in Early Days 



The first whalers may have been men who lived in 
what is now Norway. Pictures carved in rock thousands 
of years ago show these men hunting whales from canoes. 

The Basques of northeastern Spain and southwestern 
France developed whaling methods that men used for 
several hundred years. During the .-^.D. 900"s, the 
Basque whalers used small open boats. After killing 
a whale, they had to tow the body to shore before 
going after another one. 

During the 1200's, the Basques started to hunt 
whales in large sailing ships. Each ship carried several 
small %vhaleboats from which die men harpooned 
their prey. .After killing a whale, the men sliced off 
the blubber. When they had collected a full load of 
blubber, they sailed home. There, they cooked the 
blubber to get the oil. About 1600, the Basques began 
to process the whales aboard ship. The men simply 
stored the oil and other products from the whales' 
bodies. Whalers could then stay at sea for long peri- 
ods and could kill many more whales. 

The Basques hunted one kind of whale more than 
any other. This whale became known as the right whale 
because it was the right (correct) whale to hunt. Its 
blubber contained much oil. and the body was easy to 
handle after being killed because it did not sink. 

During the 1600's. the English and Dutch learned 
the whaling methods of the Basques. They sailed into 
arctic waters and hunted the arctic right whale. 

American Wlialing. The .'American Indians hunted 
right whales off the .Atlantic Coast long before English 
colonists arrived in the 1600's. The Indians went 
whaling in canoes, and used harpoons with points made 
of stone, bone, or wood. 

During the 1 760's, colonists in Xew Bedford, Mass., 
began a whaling industry, Xew Bedford later gained 
fame as the whaling capital of the world. 

At first, American whalers hunted only the right 
\vhale and the arctic right whale. These whales pro- 
vided whalebone (baleen) for women's corsets, bustles, 



and hoopskirts. Manufacturers also used baleen to make 
bugg\- whips, umbrellas, fishing rods, and other articles 
that had to be strong, light, and elastic. 

.\bout 1815, .Americans began to hunt the sperm 
whale more than any other kind. This whale became 
especially well known after the author Herman Melville 
published his famous novel Moby Dick in 1851. See 
MoBV Dick. 

The greatest period of American whaling started in 
the 1830's and lasted about 30 years. The United States 
ranked as the leading whaling nation diuing this period 
and up to the 1880's. In the 1840's, the number of 
.American whaling ships reached a record high of 
about 750. Nearly all came from such New England 
ports as New Bedford, Nantucket, and Boston, Mass.; 
New London, Conn.; and Sag Harbor, N.Y. On the 
Pacific Coast, .San Francisco became the chief whaling 
port. 

The decline of .American whaling resulted from two 
events: (1) the birth of the U.S. petroleum industry, 
and (2) the Civil War. 

The U.S. petroleum industry' began in 1859 and grew 
quickly. Less than three years later, the price of a 
barrel of petroleum had dropped from S20 to onl\- 10^. 
L'ntil this time, whale oil had been a chief fuel for 
lamps. Now, people used kerosene, a petroleum prod- 
uct, instead. Kerosene cost much less, and became the 
main product of the petroleum industry. 

During the Civil War, from 1861 to 1865, Confeder- 
ate warships sank many whaling vessels. The number of 
L'.S. whaling ships fell by almost half, to about 260. 

American whaling declined rapidly during the late 
1800's. but no one seemed concerned. .Americans did 
not keep up with the whaling industries of other 
countries, which were using harpoon guns and steam- 
ships. .Svend Foyn (1809-1894), a Norwegian whaler, 
had invented the harpoon gim in the 1860's. By 1906, 
only about 40 vessels remained of the once-mighty 
American fleet of whaling ships. 



214c 







by Borja Studio for WORLD nnOK 



W'lien an American whaling ship left port, the crew 
could expect a long voyage filled with thrills and 
danger. Most trips lasted two years, but some were as 
long as three or four years. The ship headed for a 
particular w/ia/ino ground (an area where many whales 
could be foLMid), depending on the season. 

Sighting a Whale. High up in the crow's nest, the 
lookout scanned the sea for the spout of a whale. 
He might not see the whale itself. But if the beast 
were blowing, its spout could be seen miles away. 
Often days passed with no sign of a whale. Then, 
suddenly, down came the eagerly awaited cry of the 
lookout: ""Thar she blows! Thar she bl-o-o-o-ws!" 



The Chase. Instantly the crew sprang into action. 
The ship carried several whaleboats, and the men 
cjuickly lowered them into the water. Most of these 
sturdy boats were about 25 feet long and carried si.\ 
men — an officer and five rowers, llie officer sat in the 
stern and steered the boat. The harpooner sat nearest 
the bow and helped the other men row. 

The men rowed as quietly as possible. The whale 
could hear sounds through the water, and a strange 
noise might frighten it away. If the men faced a long 
chase, they hoisted a sail instead of rowing. 

The Harpooning. .\s the boat came near the whale, 
the harpooner stood up and held his har|5oon ready. 



The Harpooning 






A 

"Nantucket 

Sleigh Ride" 



chase of the Bouhcad whale hy Chffurd \V- A-hlt.-y, courlusy of Mi , J,.hji P. Monks 



The Kil 




The Capture by Benjamin Russell. The Whaling Museum, New Bedford. Mass. 



The harpoon measured about 8 feet long from its sharp 
steel point to the end of its wooden pole. A long rope, 
called the whale line, was attached to the harpoon. 
The other end of the rope was fastened to a post in the 
stern, where the line lay coiled in a tub. 

The harpooner waited until he had '"wood to black 
skin" — that is, until the boat almost touched the whale. 
Then he threw the harpoon with all his strength deep 
into the side or back of the huge beast. 

After being harpooned, most whales either dove or 
ran (swam a\\ay swiftly). The whale line smoked as it 
uncoiled at great speed. If the whale sounded too 
deeply, the men had to cut the rope, or the animal 
would pull the boat under water. If the whale ran, it 
took the men on what they called a "Nantucket sleigh 
ride." The '"ride" often lasted for hours as the whale 
swam miles across the sea. The boat bounced along 
behind in a shower of spray. -Sometimes the whale at- 
tacked the boat instead of diving or swimming away. 
The whale could smash the boat with one blow of its 
powerful tail. A sperm whale often tried to grab the 
boat in its mouth. Many whalers lost their lives. 



The Kill. Finally tlie whale tired. The men pulled 
on the rope and again brought the boat close to theii 
prey. Then the officer lanced (pierced) the whale's 
lungs with a long iron blade, and the animal bled 
to death. 

Processing the Whale. The men towed the dead 
whale back to their ship and tied it alongside. Using 
spadelike knives on long poles, they peeled off the 
valuable blubber. The whalers peeled the blubber off in 
one long spiral strip as the huge body rolled over in the 
water. 

The crew lifted the blubber aboard the ship and cut 
it into strips called blanket strips. These were cut into 
block-shaped pieces. The men then cut the blocks 
of blubber into baconlike slices called Bible leaves. 
They removed the \aluable oil by trying out (cooking) 
the blubber in large iron pots called try pots. 

The men also cut out the long plates of baleen. Or, 
if the whale was a sperm whale, they removed the 
spermaceti from the head and looked in the intestines 
for ambergris. The rest of the whale's body had no 
use, and the men cut it loose. 



215 




Whaling Today 

The whaling fleets of the world kill about 60,000 
whales every year. These whales supply about 3,000,000 
barrels of whale oil a year. Japan and Norway are the 
leading whaling nations, followed by Russia and Great 
Britain. 

Modern Whaling Methods center mostly around 
factory ships in the antarctic and North Pacific regions. 
A factory ship weighs about 30,000 tons and carries 
about 400 men. There are about 25 of these factory 
ships, and they capture aroimd 45,000 whales a year. 
In addition, about 50 shore stations operate in many 
countries. They send out catcher boats that capture 



Hunting Whales is done by catcher boats. 
Each boot has a harpoon gun on its bow. 
The harpoon carries a bomb that explodes 
inside the whale and l&lt;ills it. 



Bringing a Whale Aboard, the huge body 
is dragged up a romp in the stern of the 
factory ship. An iron claw, fastened in front 
of the tail, hauls the whale up to the deck. 



rhrlsr.iphpr F. Ach 





Processing Whales is done on factory 
ships. The valuable parts of a whole con be 
removed in about on hour. A factory ship may 
carry an airplane to help locate whales. 



Removing the Blubber from a whale is a 
job done by men called ftensers. They peel 
off the blubber with long knives and cut it 
into strips. 

Chrislnphor E. Ash 



I 



Cutting Meat and Bones from the huge 
body, betow, is the work of men called lem- 
mers. The baleen is one of the few parts of the 
whale to be thrown overboard as useless. 





around 15,000 whales annually. The U.S. whaling in- 
dustry consists only of two shore stations at Richmond, 
C^alif. A few catcher boats from these stations hunt 
whales in Pacific waters between San Francisco and 
Monterey, Calif. 

A factory ship has as many as 1 2 large diesel-powcrcd 
catcher boats, whose crews do the actual hunting. These 
boats weigh from 400 to 500 tons. Each catcher boat 
has a harpoon gun that shoots a 5-foot iron harpoon. 
The harpoon weighs about 150 pounds and has a 
bomb attached to its head. The bomb explodes im- 
mediately after the harpoon enters the whale's body. A 
gunner (harpooner) on a catcher boat can shoot a whale 
from 50 to 75 yards away. 

Most whales himted today are finback whales and 
sperm whales. Whalers hunt smaller numbers of blue, 
sei, and humpback whales. Finback and blue whales 
sink almost as soon as they die. To keep a dead whale 
afloat, the men pump air into it. They pierce the 
abdomen or the chest with an air spear, a sharp pipe 
attached to the tip of a long pole. The men pump 
compressed air into the whale through a rubber hose 
connected to the pipe. Then either buoy boats or the 
catcher boats tow the dead whales back to the factory 
ship. 

At the stern of the ship, a huge iron claw grabs 
the whale in front of its flukes. The claw drags the 
whale up a ramp to the deck for processing. 

Men called flensers peel off the blubber like the 
skin of a banana. They cut it into long strips and drop 
the strips into large holes in the deck. The blubber falls 
into cooking machines called digesters, which remove 
the oil. 

The rest of the whale's body is cut up by men called 
lemmers. They drop the meat and bones into digesters 
to make meal for cattle food and fertilizer. Whale 
meat for human food is cut into large chunks, then 
frozen to keep it fresh. The men throw away only the 
baleen, the stomach, and some parts of the intestines. 

A factory ship can process a whale an hour. During 
a good hunting season, the gunners can kill enough 
whales to keep the ship working day and night. 

Whaling Regulations help keep whales from being 
wiped out by man. In 1946, the whaling nations set up 
the International Whaling Commission to regulate the 
industry. Every factory ship and shore station has 
inspectors assigned by its nation. The inspectors ex- 
amine each whale killed to make sure the regulations 
have been obeyed. 

The International Whaling Commission does the 
following: (1) Prohibits the killing of whales under a 
certain length. The length varies among different 
species. (2) Prevents most whale hunting in warm ocean 
regions where baleen whales breed. (3) Determines the 
total amount of oil that can be taken from all kinds 
of baleen whales in the Antarctic during a whaling 
season. (4j Forbids the killing of right whales, arctic 
right whales, and gray whales. (5) Restricts the opera- 
tions of shore whaling stations to six straight months 
of the year. (6) Forbids the killing of calves or of cows 
nursing their young. (7) Requires each whaling com- 
pany to make an annual report to the commission. This 
report includes the number and kinds of whales killed, 
the sex and length of each whale, and the place and 
date each whale was killed. 



WHARTON, JOSEPH 

Scientific Classification. Whales belong to the order 
Celacea. Toothed whales, together with dolphins and 
porpoises, make up the suborder Odontoceti. Baleen 
whales form the suborder Mysticeli. The sperm whale 
belongs to the family Physeleridae. It is classified as 
genus Physeter, species P. catodon. The blue whale belongs 
to the family Balaenopteridae. It is Balaenoptera (Sibbaldia) 
musculus. Raymond M. Gilmore 



Related Articles in World Book include: 



Ambergris 
Animal 
Antarctica (Seals 

and Whales) 
Beluga 
Blubber 



Cetacean 
Dolphin 

Fishing Industry 
Killer Whale 
Melville, Herman 
Moby Dick 



Narwhal 
Pilot Whale 
Porpoise 
Rorqual 
Sperm Whale 
Spermaceti 



Outline 

I. Kinds of Whales 

A. Toothed Whales 

B. Baleen Whales 
II. Life of the Whole 

A. .Swimming and Diving 

B. Eating 

III. Whaling in Early Days 

A. The Basques 

B. American Whaling 

IV. "Thar She Blows'." 
V. Whaling Today 

A. Modern Whaling Methods 

B. Whaling Regulations 

Questions 

What is the most easily seen diff'erence between a 
whale and a fish? 

What happens when a whale blows? 

What was a "Nantucket sleigh ride"? 

How can whales drown? 

What is baleen? Blubber? 

When was the greatest period of American whaling? 

What two events caused American whaling to decline? 

What is the whale's only enemy other than man? 

WHALE SHARK. See Sh.«lRK (Kinds of Sharks; 
picture). 

WHALES, BAY OF. See Amundsen, Roald. 

WHARF. See H.arbor. 

WHARTON, EDITH NEWBOLD JONES (1862T937), 
an American novelist, was noted for her stories about 
society life. In them she pictured the dignity and good 
taste of the old social order and contrasted it with the 
"dog-eat-dog" characteristics she ascribed to the new 
society. Her most representative novels deal with the so- 
cial and psychological conflicts of wealthy society in 
New York City. These include The Age of Innocence 
(1920), for which she won the 1921 Pulitzer prize for 
fiction. The House of Mirth ( ! 905) satirized the dominant 
social class as a class without genuine gaiety or wealtli 
of spirit. 

Mrs. Wharton published her first short stories in The 
Great Inclination {IS99). Her novel, The I'alley of Decision 
(1902), is set in Italy in the 1700's, and Ethan Frome 
(1911) takes place in rural New England. Her other 
works include Summer (1917), A Son at the Front (1923), 
The Mother's Recompense (1925), and Here and Beyond 
(1926). a collection of short stories. She was born in 

New York City. Harrv H. Clark 

WHARTON, JOSEPH. See Iron .\nd Steel (Famous 
Men in Iron and Steel). 



217 




WHEAT 




v.,^ 










WHEAT is the world's most important grain crop. 
Wheat kernels, or seeds, are ground into flour to make 
bread and other products. These wheat products are 
the main food of hundreds of millions of people through- 
out the world. As a result, wheat covers more of the 
earth's surface than any other food crop. The world's 
wheat farmers grow about 9,000,000.000 bushels of 
wheat a year. This wheat would fill a freight train 
stretching one and a third times around the world. 

\\ heat is a grass-type plant. It belongs to the group of 
grains called cereals (see Grain). Other important 
cereals are rice, oats, corn, barley, and rye. In recent 
years, world production of wheat has passed that of rice. 
Wheat is a common food in North and .South .\merica, 
Europe, Africa, Australia, and much of .*\sia. 

At harvesttime in the great wheat-producing regions, 
the rippling fields of grain stretch for hundreds of square 
miles like a golden ocean. Giant machines knife through 
these fields of grain, cutdng and threshing the wheat. 

Different kinds of wheat grow successfully in hot, 
cold, or dry climates. Scientists are always at work 
developing new varieties of wheat that will not only 
resist cold, plant disease, and insects, but also will 
increase the yield. 

The Wheat Plant 

Appearance. Especially when it is young, wheat looks 
like grass. The wheat plant is a bright green color. 
It may grow from two to five feet tall, and it turns 
golden brown when it is ripe. Most of the root system 
of the wheat plant is in the upper fifteen or txsenty 
inches of the soil. In loose ground, the roots may extend 
down farther. The leaves are long and slender. The 
wheat head that holds the kernels is at the top of the 
main center stem. Many varieties of wheat have coarse, 
prickly hairs called beards on the husk of the wheat 
kernel. A healthy plant produces an average of fifty 
kernels of wheat. The clusters of kernels cling tightly to 

2l8 



the stem until they are fully ripe. The grains of wheat 
are white, red, or yello\\. In a few regions, purple 
wheat is grown. 

The Wheat Kernel is an eighth to a quarter of an 
inch long. It is divided into three main parts. These 
are the germ, the bran, and the endosperm. The germ is 
the part where growth starts after the seed is planted. 
It makes up a small part of the kernel. The hrari, or 
"coat," is made up of several layers that protect the 
kernel. It is much like the shell of a nut. The bran 
makes up about one-seventh of the kernel. The most 
useful part of the wheat kernel is the endospetm. This is 
the part that is made into white flour. The secret of 
the superiority of wheat over other grains for making 
bread lies in the endosperm. It contains a large amount 
of a protein called gluten. This is the stretchy material 
that, along with yeast, makes dough rise (see Gluten). 
The husk of the entire kernel is a strawlike material 
called chajf. 

How Wheat Is Used 

In most \\'estern countries, wheat appears in some 
form at almost every meal. About three fourths of all 
the flour milled is used by commercial bakers to make 
bread, rolls, buns, cookies, cakes, pies, and other baked 
goods. 

Wheat Flour. About 500,000,000 bushels of wheat 
are ground into 22,900,000,000 pounds of flour in the 
United .States each year. The average amount of wheat 
used by each person in the United .States in a year is 
about 1 1 7 pounds. In making \\ hole wheat flour, the 
entire kernel of wheal is milted (ground). To produce 
white flour, the bran and germ are removed and only 
the white inner part of the grain is used. See Flour. 

In the process of milling white flour, some of the 
food value of the wheat is lost. In 1941, the United 
States government established standards for enriching 
white flour. Most millers and bakers now add three B 




Head- 



Parts of 
the Plant 



r 



Stem &lt;^ 



\ 



Leaves 



^SSk 



Roots 



THE WHEAT PLANT 



Ready to harvest, the wheat plant has a golden-brown 
color ond may stand five feet tall. The kernels, be/ow 
ond I'nief, are one-eighth to one-fourth inch long. 

Gall..\va.\ ; J. W, McMantgal 




The Wheat 
Kernel 



Endosperm or 
Starchy Port 



Layers of 
Bran 



Husk 



Germ or 
Embryo 



tc.S'wv^ 



Cross Section 
of a Kernel 




WHEAT 

vitamins to white flour and bread. The government ap- 
proved the enriching process to help combat diseases 
caused by improper diet. Enriched and whole grain 
products provide from a fourth to a third of the protein, 
thiamine, iron, niacin, and riboflavin in the average 
American's diet. When bread is made with milk, it also 
contributes about one seventh of the calcium a person 
needs. See Bread. 

Breakfast Foods. Some wheat is used in making 
breakfast foods. These breakfast foods are of two general 
types. Ready-lo-eat wheat breakfast foods include puffed 
wheat, wheat flakes, shredded wheat biscuits, and bran 
flakes. Cooked wheat breakfast foods include wheat 
meal, whole-wheat meal, cracked wheat, rolled wheat, 
malted cereals, farina, and similar products. 

Macaroni Products. Coarse particles of wheat are 
mixed into a paste and forced through machines to 
make macaroni and spaghetti. Wheat paste is rolled 
into sheets and cut into strips for noodles. See Maca- 
roni. 

Animal Feed. Bran and other parts of wheat left 
over from the milling of white flour are used in live- 
stock and poultry feeds. Wheat that is not suitable for 
milling is also fed to livestock. 

Other Products. Wheat germ and wheat-germ oil are 
taken from the embryo (germ) of the wheat kernel. 
These products are used in some breakfast foods, and 
are sometimes added to specialty breads and other 
foods. Wheat germ contains vitamin E and the B 
vitamins riboflavin and niacin. Glutamic acid is another 
bv-product of wheat. A well-known product made from 
glutamic acid is monosodium glulamale. This saltlike 
substance has little flavor of its o\vn, but it brings out 
the flavor of other foods. 

Wheat may also be used to produce alcohol for syn- 
thetic rubber or munitions. Flour paste, the filler for 




insect-destroying preparations, and certain coffee sub- 
stitutes, require wheat. Strawboard used in boxes, and 
straw for fertilizer and other uses, are products made 
from the stem of the wheat plant. 

The Search for New Uses. Wheat has become so im- 
portant in the United States that there are many mill- 
ing laboratories and agricultural experiment stations 
devoted to research on this grain. Milling and baking 
companies and allied industries maintain testing kitch- 
ens to develop new uses for wheat products. 

Plant breeders and research workers are hard at work, 
not only on crossbreeding wheat for superior qualities, 
but also on developing new kinds of cereeils. 

Kinds of Wheat 

There are two general groups of wheat. These are 
winter wheal and spring wheat. The wheat the farmer 
plants depends mainly on the climate of the region. 
He sows winter wheat in mild climates. Spring wheat is 
planted in regions where winter weather is extremely 
cold. Each major wheat group includes varieties of 
both hard wheat and soft wheat. 

Winter Wheat is planted in the fall and harvested 
the following spring or summer. Winter wheat gets a 
start before cold weather begins. Growth stops during 
the winter, then begins again in the spring. If winter 
wheat is planted in the spring, it ordinarily will not 
head (produce a crop). Winter wheat needs fairly low 
temperatures so that it can develop properly during 
early growth. Among important varieties of winter 
wheat grown in the United States are Triumph, Wichita, 
Pawnee, Cheyenne, Comanche, Knox, and Seneca. 

Spring Wheat is planted in the spring and ripens the 
same summer, usually a few weeks after the winter 
wheat. If spring wheat is planted in the fall, it will not 
live through the winter except in mild climates or dur- 
ing unusually warm winters. Among important varieties 
of spring wheat grown in the United States are Selkirk, 

VARIETIES OF WHEAT 

Pawnee, far left, is a bearded win- 
ter wheat that mokes excellent bread flour. 

Redman, left, is a beardless spring 
wheat that is resistant to stem rust. 

nt Elgin, below, is a beardless winter 

[J wheat widely used for pastry flour. 

S* USOA 




Food Value of Edible Parts of Wheat 




CARBO- 
HYDRATES 
70% 



MINERALS- 



Lee, Thatcher, Contey, Rescue, Rushmore, and Centana. 

Species of Wheat. All the wheat grown throughout 
the \\ orld belongs to one of fourteen species. Seven of 
these species are grown in the United .States, but only 
tlirec are of special importance. These are common, 
club, and durum wheats. 

Common wheat is bread wheat. It is closely related 
to club wheat. It probably originated in Turkey and 
southern Russia. The most important common wheat 
states are Texas, Kansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma, 
Colorado, North and South Dakota, Montana, and 
Minnesota. Club wheats are grown only in the Pa- 
cific Coast states. Elgin and Hymar are the leading 





SPECIES 1 


OF WHEAT 






Common Name 


Latin Name 


Common Nome 




Latin Name 


Club 


I nlicmn 


Enejlish 


7 


. tur«idum 




compactum 


Shot r. 


spbaerococcum 


Common 


T. aeslivum 


Spelt 




T. spelta 


Durum 


T. durum 


Wild Einkorn 




1 . ae^ilo- 


Einkorn 


T. monococcum 






p aides 


Emmer 


T. dicoccum 


Wild Emmer 




T. dicoc- 


Macha 


T. macha 






coides 


Persian 


T. persicum 


Timopheevi 




T. timo- 


Polish 


T. polonicum 






pheevi 



club wheats. Durum is a hard, tough wheat. It is 
similar to Polish and English wheats, but is much more 
important commercially. Spaghetti and macaroni 
makers use Stewart and mindum varieties of durum 
wheat, because they hold together well while cooking. 
In North America, durum wheat grows in North 
Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, and Minnesota, and 
in parts of Canada. 

Varieties of Wheat. Each species of wheat is divided 
into many varieties. About 30,000 varieties of wheat are 
grown in various parts of the world. More than 200 
of these grow in the United States. Each is different 
from the others in some way. E.xperts study these va- 



WHEAT 

rieties in milling laboratories and agricultural experi- 
ment stations. They analyze these wheats and cross- 
breed them to get the outstanding qualities of each. 
Wheat from other countries is brought to the United 
States for experiments. The U.S. Department of Agri- 
culture has collected nearly 15,000 varieties of the 
world's wheat. 

The varieties of wheat are named in various ways. 
Sometimes a wheat is named for the man or men who 
developed it. Examples are Dicklow and Dawson. Some- 
times a wheat gets its name from the experiment station 
where it was developed, h'anred, the name of a hard, red 
winter wheat, was selected by the Kansas Experimental 
Station. Indian names such as Pawnee and Comanche 
are now being used to avoid the idea of geographical 
limitations implied by state names. 

Hybrid Wheats are developed by crossbreeding varie- 
ties of wheat. For example, one variety may be especial- 
ly valuable because it will resist rust and other diseases. 
Another variety may be particularly good for its bread- 
baking qualities. The plant breeder crosses the t\so in 
an attempt to get a good, rust-resistant bread wheat. 

Growing and Harvesting Wheat 

A good wheat crop depends on several things. The 
soil and the weather must be right. The seed must be 
good, and free from disease. The grain must be har- 
vested at the right time. 

Climate and Soil. The best soils for growing wheat 
are the silt and clay loams. The soil should contain 
much humiLi (decayed vegetable or animal matter) 
to provide food for the wheat plant. Wheat will grow 
at the equator or at the Arctic circle. It will grow at sea 
level or at an altitude of 10,000 feet or more. But fairly 
dry and mild regions are best for wheat farming. 

Crop Rotation. In some places, farmers grow wheat 
in rotation with other crops. For example, farmers 
plant corn, oats, clover, timothy, or soybeans one year 
and wheat the next year. They sometimes plant wheat 
every other year and keep the soil fallow (idle) to store 
moisture in the years in between the wheat crops. 
.See Dry Farming; Rot.\tion of Crops. 

Preparing the Ground. Usually, the farmer prepares 
the land a considerable time before planting wheat so 
that moisture and plant food will collect in the soil. 
The first step is usually plo\\ ing. Most farmers use trac- 
tors to pull their plows. On large farms, one tractor pulls 
a gang plow, several plows joined together. Each plow 
blade makes one trench or furrow as it turns the soil. 
After the furrows are made, the farmer uses a harrow. 
This implement breaks up the large chunks of earth. 
Most farmers use disc harrows which have round, sharp 
blades to cut the lumps of earth. Often a tractor pulls 
several harrows at once. With these implements, 
farmers today can cultivate land much faster than their 
grandfathers did. 

Fertilizers containing minerals are added to the soil 
in major wheat-producing regions. 

Planting. After the ground is ready, the farmer plants 
the \\ heat. He uses from three fourths to two bushels of 
seed for each acre of ground. This amount will give 
him a yield of from 10 to 50 bushels of wheat to the 
acre, depending on the weather and soil. 



221 



HARVESTING 
WHEAT 




I 



the Wheat Ripe? The 

farmer breaks a head of wheat 
from the stem to see if the grain 
is dry enough to harvest. 



J. W, McMnnigal; Interiintional Harvester 

A Combine, a big self-propelled ma- 
chine, cuts wide swaths through the wheat 
field. The combine also threshes the grain. 



Most wheat fanners use a piece of farm machinery 
called a drill to plant the seed. The drill drops seeds 
directly into the furrows, and then covers them with 
earth. With a large power drill, one man can plant 
more than a hundred acres of wheat in a day. 

Care During Growth. After the wheat seed is in the 
ground there is not a great deal the farmer can do for 
his crop. While the wheat is growing, the busy farmer 
usually finds time to repair and service his equipment 
in preparation for the harvesting season. He hopes for 
favorable weather, and for freedom from plant disease 
and from harmful insects. Sometimes the farmer sprays 
chemicals on fast-growing weeds to kill them and keep 
them from robbing the wheat plants of nourishment. 

Effects of Weather. Winter wheat is planted early 
enough in the fall to get a good start before winter. 
The kernels absorb moisture and then they sprout. Cold 
weather halts their growth. Snow actually serves as a 
blanket to keep the cold from the winter wheat. The 
farmer who plants his wheat in the fall fears extremely 
cold winters with little snow. 

When spring arrives, w^inter wheat plants awaken and 
begin to grow again. 

Wheat planted in the spring has a much shorter 
growing period and faces fewer weather hazards. 
Either extremely wet weather or very dry weather will 
destroy both spring and winter wheat. Other weather 
hazards include hail, high winds, and dust storms. 

Harvesting Wheat. Once wheat is ready, it must be 
harvested as soon as possible before bad weather can 
ruin the crop. Wheat is ready for harvest when it is dry 



and hard. The farmer can test it by breaking the wheat 
head from the stalk, and chewing to feel the break of 
the kernels on his teeth. He also can take it to a grain 
elevator for a moisture test. On most farms, machines 
called combines do the harvesting. These implements are 
combinations of reaping and threshing machines. They 
cut, tliresh, and clean the wheat. Before the develop- 
ment of the combine, harvesting machines cut the 
wheat. Then threshing machines separated the chaff 
and stems from the kernels of grain. .See Combine; 
Rf.aping Machine; Threshing Machine. 

The Enemies of Wheal 

Nature subjects wheat to many attacks. Among the 
enemies of wheat are insects, and diseases such as 
mst and smut. Some wheat varieties are resistant to 
some of these enemies. Other varieties are not. 

Rust is one of the most destructive of wheat diseases. 
It produces small rust-colored spots on the leaves, stems, 
and heads of wheat. These spots later turn brown. There 
are two important kinds of rust — stem rust and leaf rust. 
Stem rust is more destructive. It attacks the plants at 
any time after the heads appear. The rust uses most of 
the food and water needed by the wheat plant, so the 
kernels of wheat dry up. There is not much that the 
grower can do to prevent rust except to destroy plants 
such as barberry that harbor the met that later spreads 
to the wheat. Scientists keep developing varieties of 
wheat that resist rust. See Rust. 

Smut. Another serious disease which attacks the 
wheat kernels is smut. The two main kinds in this 



222 




HARVESTING WHEAT 
IN OTHER LANDS 



In Sweden, where the climate is damp, 
farmers sometimes have to hang the wheat 
stalks on tall racks to dry. 



JaIlle^. Sav\dors 

Blessing the Crop. Farmers on the high plains of Peru, South 
America, moke crosses of wheat to give thanks for a fine harvest. 
The priest then adds his blessing for the bountiful crop. 



country are covered smut and loose smut. When the wheat 
kernels are infected with covered smut, the inside of the 
kernel becomes a powdery- black ball filled \\ ith smut 
spores. The wheat kernels then are known as smut balls. 

When these smut balls break, they have a foul, fishy 
odor. When they break during threshing, the smut 
spreads and may infect thousands of healthy kernels. 
If infected kernels are used for seed, the next crop is 
damaged also. The disease can be controlled best by 
seed treatment before planting, and by planting varie- 
ties of wheat which are resistant to smut. 

Wheat plants infected with loose smut have both 
kernels and chaff replaced with the black smut spores. 
Only the central stem of the wheal remains. The spores 
are carried by the wind to other plants. Loose smut is 
difficult to treat. Smut spores flow into the yoiuig 
\\heat flowers and grow into the young kernels. A dust 
preparation will not kill loose smut, but it can be killed 
by putting the grain in water heated to a temperature 
of exactly 1 29° Fahrenheit. .\ slightly higher tem]5era- 
ture will kill the wheat and a lower one w ill not kill tlie 
smut. .See Smut. 

Other Diseases. There are several other wheat 
diseases caused by fungi, including scab, take-all. flag 
smut, leaf spot, and glume blotch. These diseases usually 
do not cause wide-spread damage. Black chaff, a disease 
caused by bacteria, and mosaic, a disease caused lay a 
virus, are of less importance. See Mosaic Dise.\se. 

Insects. The Hessian fly causes great damage to 
w heat. This fly is about the size of a mosquito. It lays 
eggs on the leaves of the wheat plant. The maggots, or 
young flies, that hatch from the eggs crawl between the 
leaf and the stem and suck the juice of the plant. .Small 
stems may be killed at once, and stronger stems may be 
\\eakened so much that they break before harvest. 
Planting winter wheat after the fall brood of flies has 
hatched helps to avoid heavy crop damage. Scientists 
have developed several varieties of wheat that are 
resistant to the Hessian fly. See Hessi.\n Fly. 

Grasshoppers and locusts cause a great deal of wheat 
damage in some areas. See Gr.asshopper: Locust. 

Other insect enemies are wheat jointworms, sawflies, 
chinch bugs, army worins, wireworms, and green bugs. 



\ . •, . 




See ARi\n- Worm; Chinch Bug; Gr.aln Wee\il. 

Weeds are another enemy of wheat. Weeds use the 
w atcr and nourishment from the soil which are needed 
by the wheat plant. Morning glories damage w'heat 
fields, especially in the Pacific Northwest. Weeds can 
be killed by dusting or spraying w ith poison. .Sometimes 
this dusting is done by airplane. Planes can dust or 
spray many acres in a short time. Ground equipment is 
used whenever it is impractical to use airplanes. 

Main Wheat Regions of the World 

In the United States, the many varieties of wheat are 
planted at diflerent times of the year and in different 
areas. In the southern Great Plains — Oklahoma. Texas, 
Kansas. Colorado, and Nebraska — hard red winter 
wheats are grown, Famiers of the northern Great Plains 
— North Dakota. South Dakota. Montana, and Min- 
nesota — plant hard red spring w heat. The w inters are 
often too severe for winter wheat in this region. 

In the eastern United .States, in the valleys of the 
Ohio and Potomac Rivers, wheat is often grown in 
rotation with other crops. Soft red winter wheat is 
planted widely in these areas. ^Vheat is also grown in 



223 




A Stubble of Wheat Stalks may be all that remains after hailstones 
pound the grain. The hail breaks the wheat heads from the stems. 



Grasshoppers, or Locusts, have plagued 
wheat farmers since the days of ancient Egypt. 
Clouds of these insects may settle on wheat fields 
and devour the crop. 





The Chinch Bug is one of the worst enemies. 
This insect feeds on young wheat. 



the Columbia River Basin, and in the "dry farm" up- 
lands of Washington, Oregon, and Idaho. This region 
has rolling land and deep, fertile soils that hold water 
well. Most of the rain falls during the winter months. 
In this region, wheat usually is planted every other 
year to take advantage of the rainfall for two years. 
Hard or soft varieties of white wheat are popular in this 
region. Considerable wheat also grows in New York 
and Michigan. 

The durum wheat used in making macaroni prod- 
ucts grows in northern Minnesota, Montana, North 
Dakota, and South Dakota. The rainfall there is light. 
In such dry sections, the land often is plowed in the 
summer and planted the next spring. This practice is 
called summer fallowing. 

In Canada, the spring wheat region extends through 
the provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Alberta. 
Rainfall is light and summer fallowing is common. 
Durum wheat grows well in Canada. 

In Other Countries. Russia ranks as the leading 
wheat-producing country in the world. Although Russia 
does not grow enough for its own needs, it produces an 
estimated 2,537,380,000 bushels a year. This is about 
twice as much as the U.S. produces. The soil in the 
southern part of Russia is well suited for wheat. This 
black-soil belt extends more than 1,500 miles from the 
Ural Mountains on the northeast into the Danube 
River Basin on the southwest. This level prairie land 
has a deep, fertile soil. The climate is similar to that of 
the Great Plains area of the United States, though the 
winters are much colder and there is less rainfall. Wheat 
has grown in Russia for hundreds of years. Many tough, 
drought-resistant kinds of wheat have been developed 
there. Wheat also ranks as a major crop in Argentina, 
Australia, Bulgaria, China, France, Germany, India, 

224 





The Hessian Fly, left, in some 
years has destroyed one tenth 
of the wheat crop in the United 
States and Canada. The fe- 
male fly lays its eggs on the 
leaves or lower joints of the 
plant. The maggot, above, 
sucks the juice from the wheat. 



Loose Smut stunts the growth of a 
healthy wheat plant, right, and turns 
it into a dusty mass of smut spores, left. 



Healthy 



Diseased 



f 



Italy, Romania, Spain, Turkey, and Yugoslavia. 

In South America, the chief wheat-producing region 
is the fertile, level prairie extending from the Atlantic 
Ocean to the foothills of the Andes Mountains. This 
region includes parts of Argentina and Uruguay. The 
climate is mild, although frosts sometimes cause 
damage. Large grain farms are scattered among cattle 
ranches. 

.Southeastern Australia, northwestern India, Pakistan, 
and northeastern China all produce much wheat. Aus- 
tralia exports a large part of its crop. 

Marketing Wheat 

Transporiation. Years ago, transporting wheat was 
not a great problem, because only small amounts of 
grain were moved. The farmer stored his grain and took 
it to the mill to be ground when he needed flour. 
Usually, the miller kept part of the farmer's wheat as 
payment for the grinding. The miller could then use the 
wheat to buy other goods. When cities grew large, the 
transportation of wheat became a problem. Wagons, 
river boats, railroads, and ships were used to keep pace 
with the growing demand for the food and other prod- 
ucts made from wheat. 

Today, large trucks usually carry grain to near-by 
country elevators for storage. The grain is held there 
for shipment to a milling company or to large terminal 
elevators or storage bins. At the terminal elevators, the 
kernels are poured through great spouts into railway 
freight cars. On the Great Lakes, ships carry the wheat 
to the mills. 

Storage. When wheat is trucked to grain-storage 
elevators, a machine lifts and tips each tmck so the 



WHEAT 

\\ heat nins into a pit below . Then small metal buckets 
on cups attached to a moving belt scoop up the wheat. 
The belt carries the grain to the top of the elevator 
and dumps it inside the tall, round bin. See Grain 
Elevator. 

.Storage elevators are always near highways, rail- 
roads, or waterways. There are about 15,000 of these 
elevators in the L'nited States. Wheat in small, country 
elevators often is sold to larger storage centers. Some of 
the largest grain elevators are in Chicago; Minneapolis; 
Kansas Cit)', Mo.; Portland, Ore.; Buffalo; Enid, 
Okla.; Superior. Wis.; and .St. Louis. From the eleva- 
tors, the wheat is sold to flour mills or for export to 
other countries. 

The country elevators do more than store grain. 
They often run grading tests. Wheat is graded for 
quality according to government standards, and the 
grain is bought and sold on this basis. The elevators 
provide equipment for drying and cleaning the grain. 
They also furnish the fanner marketing information. 

Selling. In the United States, country elevators 
usually are the first buyers of the fanner's wheat, al- 
though some grain is bought direct by the miller. 
Much of the wheat later is bought and sold through a 
grain exchange. A grain exchange is a place where 
people who want to buy grain meet those who want to 
sell it. The exchange itself does not buy or sell. One of 
the largest grain exchanges is the Chicago Board of 
Trade. It has nearly 1,500 members. These members 
may include farmers, and representatives of elevators, 
flour-milling companies, brewers, meat packers, and 




FIGHTING THE ENEMIES 
OF WHEAT 



Dusting or Spraying the wheat field with chemicals 
helps control weeds and some insects. Airplanes can do this 
job fast and effectively. 



Piper Aircraft Corp.; Kansas State ColleKe 




Scientists work constantly at 
schools and government ex- 
periment stations to develop 
new varieties of wheat that ore 
resistant todisease and insects. 



LEADING WHEAT GROWING 
STATES AND PROVINCES 

Bushels (60 pounds) of wheat grown each year 






II 



Kansas 

268,586,000 bu. 
Saskatchewan 

214,000,000 bu. 
North Dakota 

110,237,000 bu. 
Oklahoma 

109,184,000 bo. 

Alberta 

96,750,000 bo. 

Nebraska 

86,553,000 bu. 

Montana 

78,661,000 bu. 

Texas 

74,147,000 bu. 
Washington 

66,349,000 bu. 

Colorado |i |: | % | 

61,243,000 bu. 1 T T T 1 

Based on a 4-year average of government statis 



exporters. At the exchange, customers may see samples 
of the grain they buy. At the Chicago Board of Trade, 
buyers purchase wlieat that is already in storage. They 
also make contracts to buy grain to be delivered in the 
future. This kind of buying and selling is called the 
futures market. The exchange has mles to govern the 
futures contracts. Millers and other buyers need a 



constant supply of wheat and the assurance of steady 
prices. Often, at the same time, buyers will buy and sell 
wheat for future delivery. This system, called hedging, 
gives protection against price changes. See Board of 
Trade. 

International Marketing Problems. Nations that 
grow more wheat than their own people need sell the 
extra grain to other countries. In years of high yield, 
the wheat-growing nations often raise more grain than 
they can use at home or sell abroad. Then they store 
the wheat. In some years, the world wheat supply in 
storage is greater than the next crop expected. This 
situation often causes an international problem. First 
one nation and then another cuts the price of wheat to 



HARVESTTIME AROUND THE WORLD 

Har\"estin,G[ the world's wlicat crop takes place all 

year. Each month, wheat is gathered and threshed some- 
where in the world, as shown below. 

January: .■\rgentina, .Australia, Chile, and New Zealand. 

February: India. 

March: India and upper Egypt. 

April: /Mgeria, lower Egypt, India, Iran, Mexico, Mo- 
rocco, and Tunisia. 

May: .Arizona, southern California, Texas, C'hina, Japan, 
and Spain. 

June: ( !hina, southern France, Greece, Italy, Portugal, 
.Spain, Turkey, and the United .States south of about 
40° north latitude. 

July: Bulgaria, southern England, France, Germany, 
Hungary, Romania, Russia, northern United States, 
and Yugoslavia. 

August: Belgium, Canada. Denmark, northern Eng- 
land, Tlie Netherlands, central Russia, and northern 
United States. 

September and October: Parts of Canada, northern Rus- 
sia, .Scandinavian countries, and Scotland. 

November: .Argentina. Peru, and .South .\trica. 

December: .Argentina and .Australia. 




Leading Wheat-Producing Areas 
in the United States and Canada 

..il^ffe' Winter Wheat 
^•^ittf- Spring Wheat 



get rid of its surplus. Finally, the price falls far below the 
cost of producing the wheat. .Such radical drops in price 
can completely ruin a wheat farmer. 

Representatives of wheat-growing countries have 
often tried to solve this problem. They finally agreed 
that the countries growing wheat would export only a 
certain percentage of the wheat needed on the market. 
In 1948, more than 40 nations signed an International 
Wheat Agreement. They accepted a share in whatever 
wheat was sold between nations. The price of the wheat 
was fixed to keep the international market steady. How- 
ever, in 1949, Russia withdrew from the agreement. 
The Russians complained that their e.xport quota was 
too small. A new agreement was signed in 1949. Great 
Britain dropped out when the pact was revised in 19.53. 
1 he British said the import price set on the wheat was 
too high. The agreement was again revised in 1956. 

Government Price Support. For a number of years. 
United States farmers selling wheat had a minimum 
price guaranteed by the federal government. In 1963, 
the government proposed a high price support of S2 a 
bushel and strict production controls for 1964. But 
wheat growers rejected the plan in a national refer- 
endum. They prefeixed no price supports and no con- 
trols. Farmers who limit their wheat acreage can obtain 
a guarantee of $1.25 a bushel under 1938 legislation. 

The United States government also supports prices 
through the Commodity Credit Corporation, loaning 
the fanner a fixed amount on the wheat he stores. The 
fanner then can \\ait for prices to rise, ahsays w ith the 
assurance that the loan price is a minimum. The Com- 
modity Credit Corporation held enough wheat in 1955 
to meet all domestic and export needs for more than 
t\\o years. The investment in \\ heat is greater than for 
any other commodir\- for \\hich there is price support. 

Two-Price System. Under a quota plan, farmers in 
the United .States have sometimes voted to limit the 
number of acres planted in wheat. This is to cut pro- 
duction and reduce surpluses. At the same time, the 
government limits the amount of w'heat brought into 
this countiy from abroad. The market for wheat is 
thus maintained bv law at home, but countries not 



LEADING WHEAT GROWING COUNTRIES 

Bushels (60 pounds) of wheat grown each year 

2,537,380,000 bu. 

United States f|P||||i|i 
1,292,633,000 bo. 

China (Mainland) Jl il 1= m il 11 ii 1 

1,106,793,000 bi). 

Canada tt't 

384,146,000 bu. 

France % li -f 

382,033,000 bu. 

India ll il 3 

359,803,000 bu. 

Italy i|^ 

306,552,000 bu. 

Turkey il ;i 

297,468,000 bu. 

Australia li 3 

233,396,000 bu. 

Argentina ii! 

198,572,000 bu. 

Based on a 4-year average of government statistics. 



taking part in the International Wheat Agreement still 
cut the price of wheat they sell abroad. .-\nd. because 
buyers will alwa)-s be attracted to lower prices, this 
price-cutting serves to shut the door to sales of United 
.States wheat to other countries. United States regula- 
tions prohibit price-cutting, even though the nation 
has more wheat stored than would be grown in a year. 
As a result of this situation, some farm groups have 
asked for a two-price system. Such a system would 
gi\'e wheat farmers a guaranteed price for wheat sold 




"^'^"^ Leading Wheat-Producing Areas of the World 

'^^o 



Equafor 




227 



MARKETING WHEAT 

Local Grain Elevators receive fhe harvested wheat 
Sometimes millers buy directly from these elevators. 

Thousands of Storage Bins hold surplus wheat that is 
kept off the market under government loan. 




.- GiillL)uay; J. W. McManiKal 



at home but would allow them to cut the price of 
wheat offered for sale on the world market. 

History 

The development and progress of civilization can be 
linked to the histor)' of wheat. Men once roamed con- 
stantly across the forests and plains in search of food. 
Then they discovered they could grow wheat and other 
grains. This food could be stored to eat during the win- 
ter, and seed could be planted in the spring. Man at 
last could settle down in one place, and be sure of 
having food. No longer a himter always on the move, he 
gained time to do other things. He could raise his crops, 
build a home, and plan ahead. 

With the improvement in agriculture and processing 
methods, people in some lands grew enough grain to 
feed people in other countries. In this way, trade began. 
Thriving cities replaced tiny villages. 

Nations have waged war to gain control of wheat- 
producing lands. It is often pointed out that wars usu- 
ally start after a harvest. In World W'ar I, Germany 
was defeated when its enemies cut off its food supply — 
an important part of which was wheat. 

Origin of Wheat. No one is certain when and where 
wheat first was used as a food. But when it was first 
used, it probably was chewed, as many farm children 
chew it now during harvest time. .Scientists believe that 
wheat was first cultivated in Asia betsveen the Tigris 
and Euphrates Rivers. This land was then called Meso- 
potamia. It is now known as Iraq. In 1948, Robert J. 
Braidvvood, an archaeologist of the University of Chi- 
cago, found kernels of wheat preserved in the ruins of 
an ancient village in Iraq, believed to be about 6.700 
years old. The two kinds of wheat Braidvvood found are 
similar in many ways to wheat that grows today. Sci- 
entists studying ancient civilizations have found tools 
for grinding wheat, and the ovens in which it was 
cooked. Ancient men later discovered that yeast would 
make a dough mixture rise to produce bread. 

228 



The Bible often mentions the production, uses, stor- 
age, and diseases of wheat. Thus, we know this grain 
was an important food in Palestine and Egypt. Theo- 
phrastus, a Greek philosopher who lived about 300 
B.C., wrote about the many kinds of wheat grown in the 
countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea. Wheat 
was grown in China long before the time of Christ. 

In Colonial America. Columbus brought wheat to 
the Western Hemisphere when he returned to the West 
Indies in 1493. Cortes took wheat from Spain to 
Mexico in 151 9. Missionaries carried it from there into 
what is now Arizona and California. 

Bartholomew Gosnold planted wheat at Buzzard's 
Bay, Mass., in 160Q. As early as 1618, colonists grew 
wheat at Jamestown, Va. The Pilgrims planted wheat 
when they settled at Plymouth Colony, Mass., but it 
did not grow as well as the corn the Indians planted 
along the Atlantic Coast. During the late i 700's, pio- 
neers settling in western New York and Ohio Valley 
had better luck with their wheat crops. 

Early Days in the United States. Wheat became one 
of the important products shipped from west to east 
when canals were built in the eastern United States. 
In the Pacific Northwest, wheat was grown at a trading 
post in Fort Vancouver, Wash., as early as 1825. By 
i860, Indiana and Illinois were the leading wheat- 
producing states. However, wheat acreage increased 
rapidly in Minnesota and the Dakotas, as immigrants 
from Europe came to these areas. Red Fife, a spring 
wheat from Canada, grew especially well in these states. 

Wheat acreage expanded in Kansas and Oklahoma 
after 1873, when Mennonite immigrants from Russia 
settled there. They brought with them a new variety of 
wheat called Turkey Red. This wheat was brought to 
Halstead, Kan., from the Crimea in Southern Russia 
by a man named Bemhard Warkentin. This variety of 
wheat was far better than those in use, and soon spread 
throughout Kansas. For the next sixty years, practically 
all the wheat produced in Kansas and the .Southwest 




was Turkey Red, or some closely related variety. 

Development of Modern Tools. Before the 1800's, 
methods of harvesting and threshing were crude. For 
about 4,000 years, the sickle was the most common tool 
used. The sickle is a knife with a curved metal blade 
attached to a short wooden handle. The farmer walked 
through the \\'heat fields swinging the hooked blade to 
cut the stalks of wheat close to the ground. Then the 
wheat had to be gathered into bundles. 

The scythe was an improvement. It had a longer sharp 
blade, fastened to a longer wooden handle. The work 
went faster. Then the cradle was invented. The cradle 
had a wooden framework with long curved fingers set 
parallel to the blade. When the stalks of wheat were cut, 
they fell together on the frame. As the farmer swung 
the cradle back for another stroke, the cut wheat 
dropped away so that it could be tied in bundles easily. 
But the cradle was a heavy implement to handle. 

One of the earliest methods of threshing was to drive 
livestock over a plot of hard ground to trample the 
grain and loosen it. Then a tool called the flail was in- 
vented. The flail is a stick with a series of flat strips 
loosely hinged together by leather to the handle. The 
wheat was beaten on the ground with the flail to sepa- 
rate the kernels from their dry hulls — much like break- 
ing the shells on peanuts. Then the wheat and hulls 
were tossed into the air. The wind blew away the light 
straw and dry bits of chaff clinging to the kernels of 
wheat. This process was called winnowing. 

Cyrus McCormick invented the reaper in the 1830"s, 
partly because the heavy cradle was so hard to handle. 
Cyrus was tning to help his father, who had attempted 
unsuccessfully to build a machine to cut wheat. It 
took Cyrus some time to get all the parts of the reaper 
perfected. But, in 1831, when he was 22 years old, he 
tried out his invention. The machine worked. With 
various improvements, it has been used since. With the 
reaper, one man could do the work of many. See Mc- 
Cormick, Ok-Rus Hall. 



Terminal Elevators holding hundreds of thousands of 
bushels receive the wheat from the smaller elevators. From 
terminals, the grain goes to milts or is exported. 

At a Flour Mill, the wheat is ground, sifted, then put into 
bags. Standing the bags upside down helps to fasten the 
tops, which are sealed with glue. 




The self-hinder was an important improvement added 
to the reaper. Sylvanus D. Locke of Janesville, Wis., 
developed the first practical self-binder in 1871. A 
belt caught the cut grain, gathered it, and tied it with 
wire into bundles, or sheaves. The binder made it easier 
to gather the wheat for threshing. The sheaves were 
arranged in small stacks or shocks, piled so the water 
would drain in case of rain, and left to ripen before 
threshing. 

About 1830, the first threshing machines were used. 
John and Hiram Pitts of Winthrop, Me., in 1834 pat- 
ented a threshing machine. The wheat was fed into 
the machine, which pounded and broke away the ker- 
nels from the hull and straw. The wheat kernels poured 
out from one side of the machine. The straw and chaff 
were blown out separately. With a threshing machine, a 
few men could do in a few hours the work once done 
by many men in se\'eral da&gt;'S. 

A hundred years ago, it took more than si.\rs'-four 
hours to prepare the soil for planting, plant the seed, 
and cut and thresh one acre of wheat. Now the same 
amount of work takes less than three hours. In 1939, 
it took 47 hours to produce 100 bushels of wheat, while 
today it takes 31 hours. This means the fanner today 
has more time to learn new methods of agriculture and 
improve his farm. He has more time to be with his fam- 
ily and to enjoy life than when he spent all the daylight 
hours in the fields. 

Breeding Disease-Resistant Wheat. Cross-breeding 
t\\ o varieties of w heat has been especially effective in 
developing wheats resistant to diseases such as rust and 
smut. The plant breeder selects descendant varieties 
combining the good points of two parent varieties. One 
of the first and most important hybrid wheats was the 
Marquis variety. Charles .Saunders produced this wheat 
in Canada in the early 1900's. It took him several years 
to get the type of grain he wanted. In 1907, there were 
only twents'-three pounds of the Marquis seed. The 
grain produced an elastic dough with good baking 



229 




Gerald R. Massie 



HARVESTTIME OF THE PAST 



The Threshing Machine, a chafF-spouting steel monster, 
threshed the wheat before the days of the combine. A belt was 
connected to a tractor engine which provided the power. 



"Dinner for Threshers," a painting by Grant Wood, portrays 
the cooperative spirit of the wheat harvest before the combine 
reduced the amount of manpower needed. Neighbors helped each 
other, and the women always served a huge meal at noontime. 







III. 



IV. 



qualities. The wheat was first distributed to farmers in 

1909. Word of the new variety spread quickly. By 1913, 

Marquis seed was being imported into Minnesota and 

the Dakotas at the rate of 200.000 bushels a year. In Board of Trade 

1918, more than 300,000,000 bushels were produced. 

This helped meet the food shortage in World War I. 

Marquis ranked as the outstanding spring wheat in 
the United States and Canada for twenty years. It was 
used in the development of many other hybrid varie- 
ties of wheat. An important hybrid wheat developed 
from Marquis was Thatcher. Plant breeders of the 
Minnesota Agricultural E.xperinicnt .Station and the 
Federal Bureau of Plant Industiy produced this wheat 
in 1934. Thatcher became extremely popular with 
farmers because of its ability to resist stem rust. 

Recent Developments. The continued success in 
breeding disease-resistant wheat has resulted in larger 
wheat harvests. At the same time, there has been less 
demand for United States wheat on the world markets. 
The federal government and private industiy have 
stepped up research on new uses for wheat. The govern- 
ment tried to end wheat surpluses by setting up pro- 
duction controls. But in 1963, farmers rejected wheat 
production controls for the first time since 1941. Also 
in 1963, Congress approved the sale of $380,000,000 
worth of U.S. wheat to Russia. 

Scientific Classification. Wheat belongs to the grass 
family, Gramineae. It makes up the genus Jriticum. 

Critically roviowcd t.y WHEAT FLOUR INSTITUTE' KARL S. QU.SENBERRY 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Enemies of Wheat 

Grasshopper Mosaic Disease 

Hessian Fly Rust 

Locust Smut 

Growing and H.'^rvesting Wheat 
Agriculture (Growing McCormick, Cyrus Hall 



WHEAT 



Unclassified 
Cooperative Dust Bowl 



Grain 



Outline 



The Wheal Plant 

A. .Appearance 
How Wheal Is Used 

A. Wheat Flour 

B. Breakfast Foods 

C. Macaroni Products 

D. .\nimal Feed 
Kinds of Wheat 

A. Winter Wheat 

B. Spring Wheat 

C. .Species of Wheat 
Growing and ttarvesting Wheat 



B. The Wheat Kernel 

E. Other Products 

F. The Search for New 
Uses 



D. Varieties of Wheat 

E. Hybrid Wheats 



Army Worm 
Chinch Bug 
Grain Weevil 



VI. 



VII. 



VIII. 



A. Climate and .Soil 

B. Crop Rotation 

C. Preparing the 
Ground 

The Enemies of Wheat 

A. Rust 

B. Smut 

C. Other Diseases 
Main Wheat Regions of the World 



D. Planting 

E. Care During Growth 

F. Effects of Weather 

G. Harvesting Wheat 

D. Insects 

E. Weeds 



A. In the United States 

B. In Canada 
Marl&lt;eling Wheat 

A. Transportation 

B. Storage 

C. .Selling 

D. International Mar- 
keting Problems 

History 



C. In Other Countries 



E. Government Price 

Support 

F. Two-Price System 



Questions 



Crops) 
Combine 
Dry Farming 
Farm and Farming 
Grain Elevator 
Kansas (Agriculture) 
Manitoba (color picture) 



North Dakota (color 

picture, Many 

Combines) 
Peru (picture) 
Reaping Machine 
.Saskatchewan (color picture) 
Threshing Machine 



Products from Wheat 
Bran Flour Macaroni 

Bread Gluten Starch 



Wheat Germ 



How long a freight train would it take to hold all the 
wheat grown in the world in one year? 

How many kernels of wheat does the average plant 
have? 

What are some of the weather hazards of wheat 
growing? 

What are the four leading wheat states in the United 
States? The four leading wheat countries of the world? 

What are the two chief diseases that damage wheat? 

Where do scientists think that wheat was first grown? 

How much time docs a farmer spend to grow an acre 
of wheat compared to 100 years ago? What has caused 
this change? 

What are the chief uses of wheat? 




231 



WHEAT GERM 

WHEAT GERM is a part of the wheat seed that con- 
tains material from wliich new wheat plants could grow. 
Each wheat kernel has a tiny lemon-yellow area at its 
base. This is the wheat germ, the "heart" of wheat. 
Machines used in flour mills separate the wheat germ 
from the rest of the kernel before the wheat is ground. 
Manufacturers sometimes add it to bread and other 

foods. It has a high nutritive value. Walter a. Carlson 

See also Whe.^t (Other Products). 

WHEAT STATE. .See Kans.\s. 

WHEATON COLLEGE is a privately controlled, coedu- 
cational school at W'heaton, 111. The college has a strong 
Christian emphasis. It is nonsectarian and is sup- 
ported by individuals and churches from various evan- 
gelical denominations. Wheaton has schools of liberal 
arts and sciences, theologv', and music. Courses lead 
to the B.D., B.S., B.M., B..^., and M.A. degrees. The 
college was founded in 1860. For enrollment, see Uni- 
versities AND Colleges (table). d. l. Roberts 

WHEATON COLLEGE (Mass.). See Universities and 
Colleges (table). 

WHEATSTONE, SIR CHARLES (1802-1875), was a 
British physicist and inventor. He became best known 
for his work on electrical measuring devices, including 
"Wheatstone's bridge" which he did not invent but 
improved, and for his work in electrical telegraphy (see 
Telegr.aph [Development]; VVheatstone Bridge). 

Wheatstone experimented on the speed of electricity 
in wires, and suggested that electricity be used to 
send messages. With VV. F. Cooke, he patented an elec- 
trical telegraph in 1837, about the same time that 
Samuel Morse developed his telegraph in the United 
States. Wheatstone's device was widely used in Great 
Britain. He also invented a concertina, a polar clock, 
and a cryptographic machine, and studied arc spectra 
analysis of metals. 

Wheatstone was born in Gloucester. His scientific 
papers on sound attracted attention, and he became 
professor of experimental philosophy at King's College, 

London, in 1834. Robert E. Schofield 

WHEATSTONE BRIDGE is a device that measures 
the electrical resistance of a conductor. A Wheatstone 
bridge consists of two resistances known as the bridge 
arms. The resistances of these bridge arms are known. 
The bridge also has a third resistance that is adjustable 



■ Battery 



/-A^Wv- 



Galvanometer 



___ 



Unknown 

Resistance 



AAA&gt; 



Known 

Resistance ' 



Scale 



"■■'■''■■''■■ '1' ''''I' '■■■■'■■■■ I I 



Movable 
Contact Key 

The Slide-Wire Wheatstone Bridge is balanced by moving 
a contact key along a v^ire. The portion of wire to the left of the 
key is Ri, that to the right, R4. The unknown resistance equals the 
known resistance times the ratio R3 'Ri. This ratio is found by di- 
viding the lengths of Rj and Ri as measured on the scale. 



so that the resistance can be changed. These three 
resistances are connected in an electrical circuit with 
the unknown resistance. A battery and a galvanometer 
are also connected in the circuit. The adjustable resistor 
is then varied until the galvanometer shows no flow of 
current in the circuit. At this point the bridge is said to 
be balanced. The value of the unknown resistance {R\) 
can then be computed from the known values of the 
bridge arms (Rz.Ri) and the adjustable resistance (/?») 
as follows: 

_ R2R, 

See also Galvanometer. palmer h. Craig 

WHEEL. The discovery of the wheel about 5,000 years 
ago marked one of the most important steps in man's 
development. The first important use of the wheel was 
in transportation. Wheeled carts were easier and faster 
to pull than sledges. They also permitted man to make 
better use of the work of horses and other animals. The 
wheel has found another important use in mechanics 
in controlling the flow of power. Without the wheel, 
today's civilization would be impossible. See also 
Wheel and Axle; Transportation (The Wheel). 

WHEEL AND AXLE, ACK sH, is a mechanical device 
used in lifting loads. The simplest wheel and axle has a 
cylinder and a large wheel, fastened together and turn- 
ing on the same axis. Sometimes a crank is used instead 
of a wheel. The wheel and axle is a first-class lever (see 
Lever). The center of the axle (the cylinder) corresponds 
to the fulcrum. The radius of the axle corresponds to the 
load arm. The radius of the wheel corresponds to the 
force, or effort, arm to which force is applied. 

The Advantage of a Wheel and Axle is that it can 
lift heavy weights for us with only little eflbrt on our 
part. The following law gives the ratio between the 
two: The force applied multiplied by the radius of the wheel 
equals the load multiplied by the radius of the axle. To 
reduce this to a formula, let F stand for force in tons, 
pounds, or any other measure of weight; R for the radius 
of the wheel; L for the load; and r for the radius of the 
axle. 



FXR = L Xr, or^= 



The mechanical advantage of a machine is always the 
ratio of the load (L) to the force (F) (see Machine 
[Mechanical Advantage]). Let us use an example in 
which the radius of the wheel (R) is 10 inches, the 
radius of the a.xle (r) is I inch, and the load (L) is 20 
pounds. If there were no friction, the formula would 
be expressed as ^ = \-. .Since 1 0F= 20, the force needed 
would be the same as that normally used to lift a mere 
2 pounds. The mechanical advantage, the ratio of L 
to F, would be %"-, or 10. J 

Uses of the Wheel and Axle. In the ordinary wind- \ 
lass used for raising water from a well, a crank replaces 
the wheel. The hand applies the effort to the crank. 
The weight of the bucket of water is the load. In a 
grindstone, the radius of the wheel is usually longer 
than the crank handle, because speed is needed as well ■ 
as force. Sometimes teeth or cogs may be placed around ■ 
the edge of the wheel, as in a cogwheel, or on the 
sprocket wheel of a bicycle. s. Y. Lee 

See also Ratchet; Windlass; Work. 

WHEEL LOCK. See Harquebi's; Musket; Pistol 
(Farlv Pistols). 



232 




HOW THE WHEEL DEVELOPED 



The development of the wheel began when man first used logs to 
help roll heavy loads from one place to another. An unknown in- 
ventor about 5,000 years ago may have used this rolling-log idea 
to make crude wheels from cross sections of logs attached to the 
ends of a pole. In ancient Babylon, wooden wheels with rims of 
copper have been found in the tombs unearthed at the city of 
Kish, Iraq. The Babylonians also used wheels from which they cut 



out extra wood to form lighter wheels with spokes. The Egyp- 
tians used a wheel with a leather tire tied on with thongs of 
rawhide. Greek and Roman war chariots had highly developed 
and ornamental wheels. A wheel with wire spokes and solid rubber 
tires was invented in 1 869. The first bicycles and automobiles used 
this kind of wheel. Today, cars and airplanes use wheels that are 
cushioned with springy^ air-filled rubber tires. 

233 



WHEELBARROW 

WHEELBARROW is a device for moving loads heavier 
than a man can Hft. It consists of a tub or box motmted 
on a wheel with two handles which extend under the 
body and join on the axle of the wheel. The wheel- 
barrow is an application of the principle of the lever, 
and is the kind known as a second-class lever (see 
Lever). The longer the handles of a wheelbarrow, the 
less Ibrce required to lift a given load. Wheelbarrows 
now usually have mbber tires, and may be made of wood 
or light metals such as aluminum. j. L. Meriam 

WHEELER, BURTON KENDALL (1882- ), an 
American statesman, served in the United States 
Senate as a Montana Democrat from 1923 until 1947. 
In 1924 he ran unsuccessfulh* for Vice-President on the 
Progressive party ticket (see Progressive Part\). He 
helped expose the scandals during the presidential 
administration of Warren G. Harding. Wheeler was an 
extreme isolationist before World War II. In 1962, he 
published his autobiography, Yankee from the ]Vest. He 
was born in Hudson, Mass. Harvey Wish 

WHEELER, EARLE GILMORE (1908- ), a general 
in the United Slates Army, became Chairman of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staflin 1964. He served as Chief of Staff 
for the U.S. Army from 1962 until his appointment as 
chairman by President Lyndon B. Johnson. Wheeler 
was with the 63rd Division during campaigns in Eu- 
rope in World War II. He also held high staff positions 
in Europe with L^nited States and North Adantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO) forces after the war. 
Wheeler was born in Washington, D.C., and was grad- 
uated from the L'. S. Military Academy. Maurice Matloff 
WHEELER, JOSEPH (1836-1906), was an American 
soldier. He served in campaigns against the Indians, 
before he joined the Confederate army in 1861. During 
the Civil War, he made a brilliant record as a cavalry 
general at the Battle of Shiloh and in campaigns in 
Tennessee and Georgia. After the war, Wheeler practiced 
law in Alabama, and served as a Democratic United 
States Congressman from 1881 to 1900. He also com- 
manded American forces during the Spanish-American 
War and in the Philippine Insurrection of 1900. He was 
born near Augusta, Ga., and was graduated from the 
U.S. Militaiy Academy. .\ statue of Wheeler represents 
Alabama in .Statuaiy Hall. Arthur a. Ekirch, Jr. 

WHEELER, SCHUYLER S. See Electric Fan. 
WHEELER, WILLIAM ALMON (1819-1887), served as 
Vice-President of the United States from 1877 to 1881 
under President Rutherford 
B. Hayes. He also served as 
a Republican from New 
York in the U.S. House of 
Representatives from 1861 
to 1863, and again from 
1869 to 1877. As a Con- 
gressman, he devised the 
Wheeler Adjustment in 
1874 to settle a disputed 
election in Louisiana. 

Wheeler demonstrated 
that he was a man of strict 
principles bv opposing the 
Salaiy Grab Act of "1873. 
Congress nevertheless voted 



William A. Wheeler 

Brown Bros. 




itself the hotly disputed pay increase. Wheeler refused 
to profit personally from the additional income. He 
bought government bonds, and then had them can- 
celed. Wheeler was born in Malone, N.Y. He was a 
successful lawyer and businessman. Irving g. Williams 

WHEELER DAM. See Muscle Shoals. 

WHEELER-HOWARD INDIAN REORGANIZATION 
ACT. Sec Indian, American (North ,\mcrica). 

WHEELER-LEA ACT OF 1938. See Consumer Educa- 
tion (Government .\ctivities). 

WHEELING, W.Va. (pop. 53,400; met. area 190,342; 
alt. 6r)() ft.), an industrial city on the east bank of the 
Ohio River, lies about 60 miles southwest of Pittsburgh, 
Pa. (see West Virginia [map]). The city has an area of 
about 1 1 square miles, and includes mile-long Wheeling 
Island in the Ohio River. 

Description. ^V'heeling lies on a level plain, which 
rises to steep hills, along the Ohio River. A municipal 
market and a large auditorium stand in the heart of the 
business district. Several bridges connect Wheeling Is- 
land with the rest of the city. Wheeling Downs, an 
attractive race track, occupies one end of the island. 
Two principal parks and several neighborhood parks 
add to the attractiveness of the city. Oglebay Park, a 
1,200-acre recreational area, lies outside the city. 

Wheeling has about 40 public schools. Other educa- 
tional institutions include Linsly Militaiy Institute, a 
preparatoiy school for boys; Moimt de Chantal Acad- 
emy for Girls; and Wheeling College, established by 
the Roman Catholic Church in 1954. West Liberty 
State College is also located in Wheeling. 

Industry. Wheeling lies near West Virginia's great 
coal- and natural-gas-producing region, and these min- 
erals furnish power for many of the city"s industries. 
About 400 mills and plants operate in Wheeling. The 
most important manufactures include iron and steel, 
aluminum, bronze, tin plate, metal stampings, plastics, 
glass, ceramics, tile, chemical products, textiles and gar- 
ments, pharmaceuticals, patent medicines, furniture and 
wood products. The city is also a coal shipping center. 

History. Colonel Ebenezer Zane and his brothers 
founded Wheeling in the winter of 1769-1770. They 
came from the south branch of the Potomac Valley in 
Virginia to settle a claim in the present site of the city. 
Other settlers soon joined them, and in 1774 they 
erected Fort Fincastle. In 1776, they changed the fort's 
name to Fort Henry in honor of Patrick Henry. The 
town of Wheeling was laid out in 1 793, incorporated in 
1806, and first chartered as a city in 183t). The National 
Road, now U.S. Highway 40, reached the Ohio River 
at Wheeling in 1818. 

For many years, the city served as a center of trade 
in the upper Ohio Valley. In 1852, it became the first 
city on tlie Ohio River below Pittsburgh to be reached 
by a railroad from the east. During the Civil War, 
Wheeling was the headquarters of Virginians who 
opposed secession from the L'nion. Union supporters 
organized the state of West Virginia in Wheeling on 
June 20, 1863, and the city served as the state capital 
from 1863 to 1870 and from 1875 to 1885. Wheeling has 
a city-manager form of government. F. p. Sum.mers 

WHEELING COLLEGE. .See Universities and Col- 
leges (tabic). 

WHEELOCK COLLEGE. See Universities and Col- 
leges (table). 



234 



WHEELWRIGHT, WILLIAM (1798-1873), an American 
businessman, devoted most of his life to developing 
transportation and communication facilities in South 
America. In 1823 his ship was wrecked near Buenos 
Aires, and he decided to setde in South America. He 
was appointed United States Consul at Guayaquil, 
Ecuador, in 1824. He later moved to \'alparaiso, Chile, 
and in 1840 established a steamship line to serve the 
western coast of South .•\merica. 

Wheelwright discovered coal and copper deposits in 
Chile and built the first railroad in South .\merica, from 
the mines to the coast. He built other railroads in Chile 
and Argentina, and developed the port of La Plata. He 
also built the continent's first telegraph line. He was 
born in Xewburvport, Mass. John b. McFerrin 

WHELK is a snaillike animal that lives in the ocean 
along the North .Atlantic coasts of Europe and North 
America. It has a spiral shell and grows to be about 
3 inches long. 

Scientific Classification. The whelk is in the family 
Buccinidae. The common whelk is genus Buccinum, species 
Undattim. William J. Clench 

WHETSTONE is any abrasive stone, natural or artifi- 
cial, that is used for grinding and sharpening. Artificial 
abrasives, such as silicon carbide and aluminum oxide, 
are most often used. At one time a fine-grained variety 
of quartz, called novaculite, was used for grindstones. 
This mineral was quarried in Hot Springs, Ark. Its 
uniform hard grains made it capable of grinding quickly 

and withstanding wear. Frederick H. Pouch 

WHEY. See Cheese (How Cheese Is Made). 

WHIDBEY ISLAND. See \V..\shington (Coast Line). 

WHIG, hwihg, was a name applied to political parties 
in England, Scodand, and America. H'A^ is a short 
form of the word whiggamore. a Scotch word once used 
to describe a driver of horses. 

In the late i Goo's, Scottish and English opponents 
of the growing power of royalty were called Whigs. The 
Whig party maintained a strong position in English 
politics until the i85o"s, when the Whig progressives 
adopted the term Liberal. See Great Brit.mn (History). 

In the American Colonies, the Whigs were those 
people who resented British control, and favored inde- 
pendence from Great Britain. The term was probably 
first used in New York City about 1768. The Whigs 
supported the American Revolutionary War. British 
loyalists, called Tor;«, opposed the Whigs in the struggle 
(see Tory). The terms ^Vhig and Tory fell into disuse 
after the colonies won their independence. 

The Whig Party of the 1 800's began to take shape 
about 1832. Political groups that opposed .Andrew- 
Jackson and his theories started to combine and unify 
themselves into a political party. These groups included 
the National Republicans, certain conservative factions 
of the Democratic-Republican party, and some former 
members of the .Anti-Masonic party. Some of the politi- 
cal leaders of the Whig party included such well-known 
National Republicans as Henn,- Clay, John Quincy 
Adams, and Daniel Webster. Soon many wealthy 
Southern cotton planters joined in protest against the 
democratic, leveling doctrines of the Jacksonians. In 
the north and east, many factor^' owners also joined the 
group because it supported a protective tariff. First as 
the National Republicans and later under the name 
of Whigs, these groups advocated new and broader 



WHIN 

activities for both state and national governments. 
The First Program of the Whigs followed Henry- Clay's 
".American System."' It included a proposal for a high 
protective tariff to encourage the growth of .American 
industp.-. Clay wanted to distribute to the states money 
received from the sale of federal lands, so that they 
would construct new- transportation systems of canals 
and highways. Clay argued that Western and Southern 
farmers and Eastern manufacturers formed a natural 
and interdependent economic unit that would furnish 
markets for each other, if they were connected with 
good transportation facilities. 

When Jackson and his followers came out against the 
L^nited States Bank, Clay immediately supported it. 
The Whigs soon adopted an advanced financial pro- 
gram calling for federal control of the banking system 
in the interest of sound currency. They also wanted to 
insure a supply of credit adequate to meet the increasing 
demands from expanding commercial interests in the 
East and from the moving frontier in the West. Clay 
opposed Jackson with this program in the presidential 
election of 1832, but was defeated. In 1836 the Whig 
party nominated William Henr\' Harrison, Hugh White, 
and Daniel Webster for the presidenc)-. But the Demo- 
cratic candidate, Martin \'an Buren, won easily. 

During the 1 840's, a number of able men joined the 
party. They included Horace Greeley, editor of the 
influential New- York Tribune; William H. .Seward of 
New York; Edward Everett, the Whigs' most brilliant 
orator; and .Abraham Lincoln, a law-yer in Illinois. 

The \Vhigs nominated \V'illiam Harrison as their 
presidential candidate in 1840. He won the election, 
but died after serving only one month in office. \"ice- 
President John Tyler followed Harrison as President. 
Tyler had received the nomination for \'ice-President 
mainly to attract the Southern votes. .Actually, Tyler 
was not a Whig, and opposed the Whig program. His 
opposition as President weakened the Whig strength. 

In 1844 the VV'higs renominated Henry- Clay for the 
presidency, but he lost a second time. One reason for 
his defeat lay in his refusal to take a position on slavery-. 
This cost Clay many Northern Whig votes. In the 
election of 1844, the Whigs for the first time presented 
a real political program. It included a high tariff, regu- 
lated currency, and a single term for the presidency. 

Decline of the Whigs. The Whigs managed to win 
the presidency with the popular Zachary Taylor in 
1848. Four years later they tried to repeat the victory 
with General Winfield Scott. But the Democratic candi- 
date, Franklin Pierce, defeated him. In 1856 a Whig 
convention backed Millard Fillmore, the unsuccessful 
Know-Nothing candidate for the presidency. 

The \Vhig party had already begun to break into 
sectional groups over the question of slavery. The 
Kansas-Nebraska Bill of 1854 split the parts- still further. 
Most of the Northern Whigs joined the new Republican 
party. Many of the Southern Whigs returned to the 
Democratic party-. The few- remaining Whigs had be- 
come a part of the Constitutional L'nion party by i860. 
The VV'hig party- then disappeared. George e. Mowrv 

See also the separate articles for the various Whig 
leaders mentioned in this article, such as Clay, Henry. 

WHIN. See Furze. 



235 



WHIPPET 

WHIPPET is a swift, lean, muscular dog that looks 
like a small greyhound. It was bred from the Italian 
greyhound and the terrier. 

A whippet weighs from 18 to 23 pounds and stands 
about 18 inches high. It may be black, red, white, fawn, 
or brindle. It has a narrow, pointed head, muscular 
neck, long back, and long, tapering tail. Whippets are 
popular with sportsmen for hunting rabbits and for 
racing. It can nm as fast as 35 miles an hour. The 
whippet seldom barks, but it makes an excellent 

watchdog. Henry P. D.^vis 

See also Dog (color picture. Hounds). 

WHIPPING POST is a post to which persons are tied 
when they are punished by being beaten. Such beatings 
formerly took place in public. Most villages in England 
and the American colonies had whipping posts in their 
public squares. These posts were often set up with an- 
other device for public punishment called the stocks. 
See Stocks. 

People are seldom sentenced to be whipped today. 
The prison sentence has taken the place of physical 
punishment in most civilized countries. But many coun- 
tries still have laws which will permit such sentences to 
be passed. In England, robbers may still be whipped 

The Whipping Post and the Lash were used to punish minor 
law violators in many American colonial communities. 




SS^&gt;£3:.r^S%.ei3^ 



with the cal-o' -nine-tails, a whip that is made of nine 
lengths of knotted cord. By law, wife beaters, robbers, 
and other criminals may be whipped in the state of 
Delaware. But there have been no such whippings in 
Delaware since the 1940's. Marvin w. Wolfoano 

WHIPPLE, GEORGE H. See Minot, George. 



Whippoorwill 

Halhday. National Auduhon Society 




WHIPPLE, WILLIAM (1730-1785), was a New Hamp- 
shire signer of the Declaration of Independence. He 
served as a delegate to the provincial congress in 1775, 
and to the Continental Congress in 1775-1776, and 
1778. He fought as a brigadier general in the Revolu- 
tionary War. Whipple served in the state assembly from 
1 780 to 1 784, and as financial receiver for New Hamp- 
shire from 1 782 to 1 784. He was an associate justice of 
the superior court from 1 782 until his death. Whipple 
was born in Kittery, Me. Richard b. morris 

WHIPPLE'S COMET. See Comet. 

WHIPPOORWILL is a North American bird named for 
its odd, whisding call, which sounds like "whip-poor- 
will, whip-poor-will." The whippoorwill lives in the 
eastern, central, and south- 
ern United States, as far 
north as southeastern Can- 
ada and as far south as 
Mexico and Honduras. It 
spends the winter along 
the Gulf Coast, in Mexico, 
and in Central America. 

The whippoorwill is 
about 10 inches long. Its 
spotted, brown feathers 
make the bird hard to see in 
the heavily wooded areas in 
which it lives. During the 
day, the whippoorwill usu- 
ally rests on the ground or 

perches lengthwise on a log. It flies mostly at night. 
Soft feathers help the whippoorwill fly silently. The 
bird uses its wide mouth riinmed with long bristles to 
catch flying insects. The female lays her two eggs among 
the leaves on the ground. The white eggs are delicately 
marked with lilac and brown. The whippoorwill and 
its relatives, the chuck-will's widow and the poor-will, 
often help farmers. They eat insects which harm farm 
crops. 

Scientific Classification. The whippoorwill belongs to 
the goatsucker family, Caprimulgidae. It is genus Capri- 
mulgiis, species C. vocijerus. albert wqlfson 

See also Bird (color picture. Birds' Eggs). 

WHIRLIGIG. .See Water Beetle. 

WHIRLPOOL is a mass of water which spins around 
and around rapidly and with great force. A whirlpool 
may form in water for several reasons. It may occur 
when the water current strikes against a bank which 
has a peculiar form. It may also occur when opposing 
currents meet, and it may be caused by the action of the 
wind. Rocks or tides may get in the way of an 
ocean current. When this happens, whirlpools often 
form. 

There are several well-known whirlpools. One of 
these is the whirlpool in the gorge below the falls of the 
Niagara River. This whirlpool was caused by the wear- 
ing away of a side basin out of the line of the river's 
course. The Maelstrom, which is off the coast of Nonvay, 
is formed by rocks and tides which oppose the current. 
The Charybdis, between Sicily and Italy, is formed by 
winds which act against the tidal currents. During 
storms the whirlpools become violent and dangerous to 

ships. Eldred D.Wilson 

See also Maelstrom; Niagara Falls and Niagara 
River (The Whirlpool). 



236 



WHIRLWIND is a circular whirling column of air. 
It is caused by the rising of an overheated layer of air 
near the ground. Whirlwinds occur most frequently in 
the deserts, where the sun heats the air near the dr\- 
ground to a high temperature. The motion of the air as 
it rises can often be seen, because it may carry sand and 
dust 1 ,000 feet or more above the earth. Over tropical 
oceans, some waterspouts are formed in much the same 
way. See also Waterspout. Reto \. brvson 

WHISKEY is a strong alcoholic beverage distilled 
from grain and malt. \Vhiskey is made in three steps: 
(1) mashing. (2) fermenting, and (3) distilling. First, 
whiskey makers sojik the grain in hot water to make a 
mash. Then they add malt to change the starch of the 
grain into sugar. Next, they add yeast to the mash and 
allow the mixture to ferment. Fermentation changes 
the sugar into alcohol. Finally, they distill the mash to 
concentrate the alcohol to not more than 80 per cent 
(160 proof). This is known as straight whiskey. The 
whiskey makers add distilled water to lower the alco- 
holic content to from 40 to 50 per cent (80 to 100 proof). 
Then they store the \vhiskey in barrels to age. 

Blended whiskey is a mLxture containing not less than 
20 per cent straight whiskey with pure alcohol and 
water. Bonded whiskey is any type that contains not less 
than 50 per cent alcohol ( 1 00 proof) and has been aged 
at least four years in oak barrels. 

Bourbon whiskey is made from mash in which corn is 
tlie chief ingredient. Rye whiskey has rye grains as its 
chief mash ingredient. Sour-mash whiskey is made by 
using a mash which has already been fermented to 
make ordinary' whiskey. Canadian whiskey is a distinc- 
tive product of Canada. This whiskey, which contains 
no distilled spirits less than two years old, is light in 
color and body. Scotch whisky and Irish whiskey are 
made chiefly from barley malt. 

The manufacture and the sale of whiskey are pro- 
hibited by law in the state of Mississippi and in many 

other localities. J. Bernard Robb 

WHISKEY-JACK. See Jay. 

WHISKEY REBELLION of 1794 was brought about 
by a federal tax in 1791 on United States w-hiskey 
makers. The rebellion was led by angry farmers in 
western Pennsylvania who found it profitable to turn 
much of their corn and rye crop into whiskey. They 
could ship whiskey to markets more easily and profit- 
ably than the bulky grain, because early roads and 
transportation facilities w-ere poor. 

The federal tax law permitted government agents 
to enter homes and collect money from small whiskey 
producers. Farmers throughout the Union immediately 
protested against this. In 1 792, the Congress of the 
United States removed the tax from the smallest 
stills. This change satisfied X'irginia and North Carolina 
fanners, but whiskey makers in Pennsylvania still 
refused to pay the tax. 

In the summer of 1794, the federal government 
ordered certain Pennsylvania ringleaders arrested. .\ 
series of bitter fights between United States mar- 
shals and the rebel farmers resulted. Several persons 
were killed or wounded before President George 
Washington sent in troops to stop the rebellion. 
Two rebel leaders were convicted of treason, but 
Washington later pardoned them. The Whiskey Re- 
bellion was an early '"testing ground" on the use 



WHISTLE 

of federal power to enforce a federal law within a 

state. Richard Hofstadter 

WHISKEY RING was an association of whiskey 
manufacturers and high government officials that was 
active during the 1870's in the United States. The con- 
spirators banded together to cheat the United States 
government of taxes imposed on distilled liquors. The 
Whiskey Ring was one of the great political scandals 
of the Ulysses S. Grant administration. 

The association was formed in Saint Louis, Mo., 
and soon spread to other U.S. cities. Many distillers 
were forced to join the ring in order to save their 
businesses. The illegal profits were divided among 
the conspiring government officials, some of whom 
held important positions. One of them was the chief 
clerk in the Department of the Treasury. Another, 
General Orville E. Babcock, was the private secretary 
of President Grant. 

The Treasun,' Department soon realized that it was 
losing millions of dollars in liquor revenue. It tried to 
trace the loss, but investigation was difficult. The 
thieves had friends in the Treasury Department who 
warned them of government activities. But Secretary- of 
the Treasurs' Benjamin H. Bristow finally found evi- 
dence against the lawbreakers in 1875. Many persons 
were convicted, but the leaders escaped with light 

punishment. John D. Hicks 

WHISPERING CAMPAIGN. See Prop AGANDA(Person- 

to-Person). 

WHIST, hwist. is the card game from which bridge de- 
veloped. Whist began in England and dates back as far 
as 1674. It is played with a full pack of 52 cards, which 
rank from the ace down to the deuce. Four players play 
the game. 

The cards are shuffled, cut, and dealt one at a time 
to each player in turn. The last card belongs to the 
dealer and is turned up to make the trump suit. The 
player to the left of the dealer leads a card to start the 
game. The others play in turn from left to right. Each 
set of four cards played makes a trick. 

The object of the game is to take as many of the 
tricks as possible. Players must follow suit. A player may 
trump or discard a low card of another suit if he cannot 
follow the lead. The high card of the suit led, or the 
highest trump played, wins the trick. The winner of the 
trick leads until 13 tricks have been played. 

The side that takes the most tricks counts one point 
for ever&gt;' trick taken over six. Taking all the tricks 
makes a slam. Seven points make a game in the Ameri- 
can form of whist. Other forms of the game are long 
whist, in which 10 points make game, and short whist, in 
which five points are necessary to win. Honors, or the 
ace, king, queen, and jack of trumps, are counted only 
in long whist. Four honors in one hand scores four points; 
three honors scores two points. Jerome s. mever 

See also Bridge; Hovle, Edmond. 

WHISTLE is a device that makes a sound when air 
or steam is blown through it. It usually consists of a 
tube w-ith a sharp edge called a lip. The air or steam is 
blown in one end of the tube and swirls into a vortex, or 
whirlpool-like motion, when it strikes the lip. This 
action alternately compresses and expands the air or 
steam so that it makes a sotmd. The shorter the tube, 



WHISTLER, JAMES ABBOTT 

the higher the pitch of the sound produced (see Pitch). 

Factories often mark the beginning and end of worlc 

periods with whistle blasts. Boats and ships use whistles 

for signaling. Richard H. Bolt 

WHISTLER, HinS lur, JAMES ABBOTT MCNEILL 

(1834-1903), is often considered the most original Amer- 
ican artist of the 1800's. His best-known work is an 
oil painting of his mother entitled An Arrangement in 
Grey and Black, commonly called Whistler's Mother. It 
hangs in the Louvre in Paris. See Mother (picture). 

His other important paintings include The Thames 
in Ice and Valparaiso Harbor in the National Gallery 
of Art, Washington, D.C.; Southampton Waters in the 
Art Institute of Chicago; and The Ocean in the Frick 
Collection in New \'ovk City. Old Battersea Bridge: .\oc- 
turne—Blue and Gold appears in the P.mnting article. 

Whistler was considered a master colorist, and he 
was also famous for his etchings, pastels, and water- 
colors. He made almost 400 etchings and 150 litho- 
graphs. His Venetian illustrations, his scenes along the 
River Thames, and his Little French Series placed him 
among the great etchers. 

Whistler considered himself a realist, but he believed 
that it was the artist's privilege to select only those 
elements of beauty which, 
harmoniously arranged, 
make the picture. This be- 
lief explains Whistler's dis- 
regard for accuracy and his 
ability to make a scene of 
poverty and wretchedness 
a thing of beauty. 

Whistler was born in 
Lowell, Mass. When he 
was nine, his family moved 
to Russia, where his father 
directed the building of a 
railroad. The boy studied 
at the Imperial Art Acad- 
emy of Saint Petersburg 
(now Leningrad). After he returned to America, he 
entered the United States Military Academy. But he 
disliked military' training, and was disinissed before 
completing the course. In 1856 he began to study art 
seriously in Paris, and three &gt;ears later moved to London, 
where he spent most of the rest of his life. He won 
many honors tefore his death. 

Whistler's work was so individual that he was some- 
times criticized. He was intolerant when others dis- 
agreed with him. He often called his paintings nocturnes, 
symphonies, aiTangements, and the like. Ainong the 
finest of these is the .Xocturne in Black and Gold: the 
Falling Rocket in the Detroit Institute of Arts. John 
Ruskin's contempt for this painting caused Whistler to 

sue him. Edwin L. Fulwidf.r 

WHITE is the color of pure snow. The English scientist. 
Sir Isaac Newton, discovered that white light is really 
a mi.xture of all the other colors. With a glass prism he 
broke up white light into the other colors. He also 
blended the other colors to form white. An object is 
pure white if it reflects all colors found in light. 

We cannot make white paint by mixing colored pig- 
ments, for they do not mix in the same way as light. Pig- 

238 




James Whistler 



ments absorb other colors bejides their own. The kind 
of white paint used most is made from white lead. 
Painters often use white as a mixer to make light tints. 
White has long stood for purity. In war, a white flag 
is called a flag of truce, and means "stop firing." It is 
raised when one side wants to talk with the other, or 
when a fort or ship is ready to surrender. The druids, 
the ancient magicians, and the priests of Osiris and 
Jupiter wore white robes. The ancient Persians believed 
that all the gods wore white. White is a sign of mourning 
in some Eastern countries. 
See also Color. 

WHITE is the family name of two popular American 
journalists, father and son. 

William Allen White (1868-1944) was a country- 
editor who became known as the .Sage oj Emporia. 
He made his small-town newspaper, the Emporia 
(Kans.) Gazette, one of the most famous papers in the 
world. In 1923, he won the Pulitzer prize for editorial 
writing. He also was awarded a Pulitzer prize in 1947, 
after his death, for his autobiography. 

White was born in Emporia, Kans., and was edu- 
cated at Emporia College and at the University of 
Kansas. In 1890, he left college and took a job on 
the El Dorado (Kans.) Republican. After various 
newspaper jobs in Kansas, he returned to Em- 
poria in 1895 and became 
owner and editor of the Ga- 
zette. A year later. White 
wrote an editorial entitled 
"What's the Matter with 
Kansas?" This made him 
famous overnight. The Re- 
publican party reprinted 
the article and used it in 
the campaign to elect Wil- 
liam McKinley as Presi- 
dent of the United States. 
From that time on. White's 
editorials played an impor- 
tant part in the political 
affairs of the country. 
William Lindsay White (1900- ), the son of 
William Allen White, won fame during World War II 
as a war correspondent and an author of books about 
the war. He was born in Emporia, and was graduated 
from Harvard University. After college, he worked with 
his father on the Gazette. In 1935, White joined the staff 
of the Washington Post, and two years later left to work 
for Fortune magazine. In 1940, White became a mem- 
ber of the staff of the Reader's Digest. John e. Drewrv 
WHITE, ALFRED HOLMES (1873-1953), pioneered in 
the development of engineering as a profession in the 
United States. He was associated with the University 
of Michigan. His books. Technical Gas and Fuel Analysis 
(1913) and Engineering .Materials (1939), became impor- 
tant texts. His work with the American Institute of 
Engineers, and the Society for the Promotion of Engi- 
neering Education set the standards for the American 
engineering education program. White was born in 

Peoria, 111. Herbert S. Rhinesmith 

WHITE, BYRON RAYMOND (1917- ), was ap- 
pointed an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the 
L'nited States by President John F. Kennedy in 1962. 
At 44, he was one of the youngest men ever appointed. 




AHuTt Cornwcll. MacmiUan Co. 

William Allen White 



White had served one year as deputy attorney general. 
He was national chairman of the Citizens for Kennedy 
in the 1960 presidential campaign. 

White was born at Fort Collins, Colo. He won Phi 
Beta Kappa scholastic honors at the University of Colo- 
rado, and received a Rhodes scliolarship to O.xford Uni- 
versity in England. He won national fame and the nick- 
name Whizzer as an All-American football halfback at 
the University of Colorado. White later played profes- 
sional football with the Pittsburgh Pirates (now Steelers) 
and the Detroit Lions to help finance his law studies. He 
received his law degree from Yale Law School, then 
served as law clerk to Chief Justice Fred M. N'inson in 
1946-1947. He joined a Denver law firm in 1947 and be- 
came a partner in 1950. 

See also Supreme Court of the U.S. (picture). 

WHITE, "E.B.," ELWYN BROOKS (1899- ), is an 
American author. His fantasies, Stuart Little (1945) and 
Charlotte's Web (1952), have so much wit and wisdom 
that the animals in them take on human qualities. With 
James Thurber, White wrote Is Sex Necessary? (1929). 
His other works include 'The Lady Is Cold ( 1 929), poems; 
and The Points of My Compass, prose articles (1962). 
He received the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1963. 
He was born in Mount \'ernon, N.Y. E. Hudson Lono 

WHITE, EDWARD DOUGLASS (1845-1921), served as 
Chief Justice of the United States from 1910 to 1921. 
In 1894 he was appointed an associate justice of the 
Supreme Court. He was the first associate justice to be 
promoted to Chief Justice. White became best known 
for Ills dissent in the case declaring the national income 
tax unconstitutional, and for his antitrust decisions 
requiring the dissolution of the Standard Oil and 
American Tobacco companies. He was born in Lafourche 
Parish, Louisiana. Jerre s. Williams 

WHITE, EDWARD HIGGINS II (1930- ), an air 
force test pilot, became a United States astronaut in 
1962. In 1964, he and Astronaut James A. McDivitt 
were selected to make a four-day space flight around 
the earth. White was a test pilot at Wright-Patterson 
Air Force Base before entering the space program. 

White was bom on Nov. 14, 1930, in San Antonio, 
Te.x. He was graduated from the U.S. Military 
Academy in 1952, then went into the air force. In 1959, 
he received a master's degree in aeronautical engineer- 
ing from the University of Michigan. Ford Eastman 

Sec also Astronaut (picture). 

WHITE, HUGH LAWSON (1773-1840), an American 
statesman and jurist, was a candidate for President of 
the United States in 1836. In that year, Martin Van 
Buren ran as Andrew Jackson's hand-picked successor 
on the Democratic ticket. The Whigs hoped to defeat 
Van Buren by running Daniel Webster, William Henry 
Harrison, and White. The plan failed, and White car- 
ried only two states, Georgia and Tennessee. 

\Vhite was born in Iredell County, North Carolina. 
He moved to Tennessee, where he practiced law and 
became a judge, state senator, and U.S. attorney. He 
was a U.S. Senator from 1824 to 1840. Richard n. current 

WHITE, JOHN. See Lost Colony. 

WHITE, PAUL DUDLEY (1886- ), an American 
physician, is regarded as one of the world's great 
authorities on heart diseases. He served as president of 
the American Heart Association from 1942 to 1944, and 
became president of the International Society of Cardi- 



WHITE HEART 

ology in 1954. He headed many committees and foreign 
missions, and has been a consultant of governments. He 
acted as a consultant to President Dwight D. Eisenhower. 
White was born in Boston. Noam d. Fabricant 

WHITE, PEREGRINE (1620-1703), was the first Eng- 
lish child born in New England, on the Mayflower in 
Cape Cod Bay. His father, William, died soon after- 
wards. His mother, Susanna White, then married 
Edward Winslow, becoming both the first mother and 
the first bride at Plymouth. Peregrine became a captain 
of militia and settled at Marshfield. Bradford Smith 

WHITE, STANFORD (1853-1906), was a prominent 
American architect. He had a marked talent as a drafts- 
man and decorator. In 1880, after six years in the office 
of H. H. Richardson in Boston, he became a partner in 
the New York firm of McKim, Mead &amp; White. He de- 
signed much of the decorative detail of the Villard 
Houses, Madison Square Garden, the Century Club, 
and the old Herald Building, all in New York City. His 
murder by Harry K. Thaw created a national sensation. 
White was born in New York City. Hugh Morrison 

WHITE, STEWART EDWARD (1873-1946), was an 
American naturalist and novelist. He wrote exciting 
tales of the struggles for survival of lumberjacks, miners, 
rustlers, and pioneers. Among the many books he wrote 
are The Blazed Trail (1902), The Riverman (1908), The 
Forty-Niners{\9\S), and Daniel Boone (1922). White was 
born in Grand Rapids, Mich., and was graduated from 
the LIniversity of Michigan. He went on an expedition 
to Africa in 1911, and described it in Lioru in the Path 
(1926). He wrote an autobiography, Dog Days (1930). 
He also wrote The Betty Book {\9'37), Across the Unkrwwn 
(1939), and The Unobstructed Universe (1940), books on 
mediums and extrasensory perception. Herbert R. Brown 
WHITE, WALTER C. See Automobile (Famous Men). 
WHITE, WALTER FRANCIS (1893-1955), an American 
writer, devoted his life to helping the Negro. Al- 
though White did not look like a Negro, he chose to 
regard himself as one. And in his books. Fire in the Flint 
(1924), Flight (1926), Rope and Faggot (1929), Rising 
H7/!(3'(1945), and A Man Called White (1948), he dealt 
with the problems and hopes of nonwhite people. 

White was born in Atlanta, Ga., and was graduated 
from Atlanta University. His writings were means for 
serving his cause of working for the rights of nonwhite 
people. He served as secretary of the National Associa- 
tion for the Advancement of Colored People from. 1931 
until his death. White received the Spingarn medal in 
1937 for his work on Negro rights. Edwin h. Cady 

WHITE ANT. See Termite. 
WHITE BLOOD CELL. See Blood. 
WHITE-CHEEKED GOOSE. See C.«iN.\da Goose. 
WHITE-FOOTED MOUSE is a small animal similar to 
the ordinary house mouse. Mere than 175 kinds live 
throughout North Ainerica. The white-footed mouse is 
known by many other names. It is called the deer 
mouse, wood mouse, and vesper mouse. Its soft fur is 
buff-colored on its back and pure white underneath. 
This mouse sometimes damages crops. 

Scientific Classification. White-footed mice belong to 
the family Cncettdae. They are genus Peromyscus. 
WHITE GOLD. See Gold (Jewelry); Platinum. 
WHITE HEART. See Dutchman's-Breeches. 

239 




The North Portico of the White House Faces Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, D.C. 



WHITE HOUSE is the official residence of the Presi- 
dent of the United States. The President lives and 
works in the world-famous mansion in Washington, 
D.C. The White fiouse contains the living quarters for 
the Chief E.\ecutive"s family and the offices in which 
the President and his staff conduct official business of 
the United States. Some of the most iinportant decisions 
in history have been made there. 

The 1 32-room White House stands in the middle of a 
beautifully landscaped 18-acre plot at 1600 Pennsyl- 
vania Avenue. It was officially named the Executive 
Mansion in 1818. It was later called the President's 
Mansion, the President's Home, and the President's Palace. 
President Theodore Roosevelt authorized the official 
title White House 'm 1902. 

The White House is one of the most popular tourist 
attractions in the United States. Every year, more than 
1 ,000,000 visitors go through parts of the mansion that 
are open to the public. Certain rooms in the White 
House are open to the public Tuesday through Saturday 
between 10 a.m. and noon. Tourists may take special 
tours by obtaining passes from their Senators or Repre- 
sentatives. The building is closed to the public on 
Sundays, Mondays, and holidays. 

Outside the White House 

The Main Building is 175 feet long and 85 feet 
high. A wide curved portico (porch) with Ionic columns 
two stories high stands on the south side of the mansion. 
A scjuare portico on the north side serves as the main 
entrance. Two long, low galleries extend from the east 
and west sides of the main building. The terraced roof 



covering them forms a promenade on the first floor 
level. A swimming pool and gymnasium are under the 
west terrace, a theater under the east terrace. 

The East and West Wings stand at the end of the 
terraces. The west (executive) wing contains the offices 
of the President and his staff, and the C'abinet room. 
The east wing contains the offices of the social secre- 
tary's staff and the President's militaiy aides. 

The South Lawn, often called the President's Park, 
contains many trees and shrubs planted by former occu- 
pants of the White House. For example, the south por- 
tico is shaded by magnificent magnolia trees planted 
by President Andrew Jackson. 

Inside the White House 

Public Rooms. Tourists enter the White House 
through the east wing. Most visitors are shown only five 
rooms on the first floor of the mansion, but these rooms 
represent the elegance and beauty of the entire interior. 

The State Dining Room at the west end of the main 
building can accommodate as many as 120 dinner 
guests at one time. It was remodeled in 1902. 

The Red Room is furnished in the style of the period 
from 1810 to 1830. The walls are hung with gold- 
bordered cerise silk. It contains a sofa that belonged to 
DoUey Madison. 

The Blue Room is the main reception room for guests 
of the President. Its furnishings represent the period 
from 1817 to 1841, between the administrations of 
James Monroe and Martin \'an Buren. President Mon- 
roe contributed much of the furniture now in this oval 
room in 1818. 



240 



famous rooms in the 

WHITE HOUSE 



aty Room Lincoln Bedroom 



Entrance Hall Main Hallwoy 



inside the 
WHITE HOUSE 



The Library is decorated in the 
style of the early 1 800's. The caned 
furniture was made by the Ameri- 
can cobinetmaker Duncan Phyfe. 




The State Dining Room is the scene of the Presi- 
dent's official banquets. The portrait of Abraham 
Lincoln was painted by George P. A. Healy. 

The Diplomatic Reception Room is used as the 
entrance to the White House for official functions. The 
wallpaper in this oval room was printed in France in 
1834. It shows scenes of the American outdoors. 





The Green Room has a portrait of Benjamin 
Franklin, above, painted by David Martin in 
London in 1 767. The mantelpiece beneath the 
portrait v/as ordered after the fire of 1814. 



The Red Room is furnished in the French Empire 
style popular between 1 81 and 1 830. The walls are 
hung with cerise silk edged with gold trim. The Red 
Room serves as a parlor or sitting room. 



''i?r 




The Blue Room is the main reception room for guests of the President. President 
James Monroe ordered the table, right, in 1817. It has never left the White House. 




WHITE HOUSE 

The Green Room has been restored in the style of 
the years between 1800 and 1814. Its walls are covered 
with a light green silk moire. Its furniture is in the 
style of George Hepplewhite and Thomas .Sheraton, 
two famous English furniture makers of the late 1 700's. 

The East Room is the largest room in the White 
House, 79 feet long and 36f feet wide. Guests are 
often entertained in the East Room after formal din- 
ners. It is at the end of the first floor. The East Room 
was remodeled in 1902. 

Private Rooms. The President, his family, their 
guests, and the President's staff use many other rooms 
every day. The ground floor contains the Diplomatic 
Reception Room, which is used as the entrance for 
formal functions; the library; offices of the White House 
phvsician and curator; and the kitchen. 

The second floor contains the private living quarters 
of the President and his family. The Lincoln Bedroom, 
the Treaty Room, and the Queen's Bedroom, also 
known as the Rose Guest Room, are also on the second 
floor. The third floor contains guest rooms, staff quar- 
ters, storage rooms, and a schoolroom. 

History of the White House 

The Original Building was begun in 1792. It was 
designed by James Hoban, an Irish-born architect. 
Hoban's design was selected in a competition spon- 
sored by the federal government. It showed a simple 
Georgian mansion in the classical Palladian style of 
Europe in the 1 700's. 

President and Mrs. John .Adams became the first oc- 



1807 





1814 

The White House changed 
appearance several times during 
the 1 800's. The mansion had to 
be completely rebuilt following a 
fire in 1814. The photograph of 
the White House about 1 860 
was taken by Mathew Brady, 
the famous Civil War photog- 
rapher. It may be the first photo- 
groph of the White House. 

FiMiii the Huuk The ^Vliite House by 
Amy La Follettc Jensen, Published 
by McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc.! 
(tiaily-Handy Collection 

1848 



1860 



cupants of the White House in 1800. But it was not yet 
completed, and they suffered many inconveniences. Mrs. 
Adams used the East Room to dry the family laundry. 

The White House became more comfortable and 
beautiful during the administration of Thomas Jeffer- 
son. With the assistance of architect Benjamin H. La- 
trobe, Jefferson carried out many of the original White 
House plans, and added terraces at the east and west 
ends of the building. 

A New Building. British forces burned the mansion 
in 1814, during the War of 1812. President James Madi- 
son and his wife DoUey were forced to flee. President 
Monroe completely rebuilt the White House by 1818, 
and colonnades designed by Latrobe were added to the 
north and south porticos in the I820's. 

President Theodore Roosevelt had the building re- 
paired in 1902. He rebuilt the east terrace, added the 
executive wing on the west terrace, and attempted to 
furnish the White House in a consistent style. 

Franklin D. Roosevelt enlarged the west wing. The 
east wing was also rebuilt and enlarged, and an indoor 
swimming pool was added there. 

Rebuilding and Redecorating. The White House 
undenvcnt extensive repairs during the presidency of 
HaiTy S. Tmman between 1945 and 1953. Workmen 
used concrete and steel to strengthen the dangerously 
weakened stmcture of the mansion. The third floor was 
converted into a full third story, and a second-story 
balcony was added to the south portico for the Presi- 
dent's private use. The basement was expanded, and 
the total number of rooms was increased from 125 to 132. 
But the historic rooms familiar to the .American pub- 
lic remained basically unchanged until the administra- 
tion of John F. Kennedy. In 1961, Mrs. Kennedy ap- 
pointed a Fine .Arts Committee to restore the White 
House interior to its original appearance in the late 
1 700's and early 1800's. The White House Historical 
Association was chartered in 1961 to publi-sh guide 
books on the mansion and to acquire historic furnish- 
ings for the White House. A library committee was 
formed to stock the White House libraiy with books 
representing American thought throughout U.S. history. 
Persons interested in obtaining further information 
about the White House may write to the White House 
Historical Association, 718 Jackson Place NW, 
Washington, D.C. 20025 Jamf.s Roe Ketchum 

Related Articles. .Sec the section on Life in the White 
House in articles on the Presidents, such as Roosevelt, 
Theodore (Life in the White House). Other related 
articles in World Book include: 

Blair House President of the United States 

Door (picture) (In the White House) 

Easter (picture, The Secret Service, United States 

F.a.ster-Egg Roll) White House Hostesses 

WHITE HOUSE CONFERENCES. Various Presidents 
have called national meetings of professional and com- 
munity leaders to discuss subjects of national impor- 
tance, such as child care and development, education, 
highway safety, national security, national resources for 
the future, and problems of the aged. 

Many White House conferences have dealt with spe- 
cific problems of child care and development. President 
Theodore Roosevelt called die first White House con- 
ference in 1909 to discuss the problem of care for de- 
pendent children. In 1919, a conference set up by Presi- 
dent Woodrow Wilson discussed child welfare standards. 



President Herbert Hoover called a conference in 1929 
to discuss child health and protection. A 1940 confer- 
ence, called by President Franklin D. Roosevelt, cen- 
tered on children in a democrac)-. President Harr\- S. 
Truman sponsored a 1950 conference, which discussed 
the emotional and social adjustment of children. In 
1954, President Dwight D. Eisenhower called the first 
conference to deal with educational problems. President 
Eisenhower also called a White House conference in 
1960 to discuss a wide range of problems related to 
young people. 

WHITE HOUSE HOSTESSES are the women who re- 
ceive and entertain the President's guests at the White 
House, in place of the President's wife. Thomas Jeffer- 
son was the first President to come to the White House 
without a wife. Dolley Madison, the wife of Secretary 
of State James Madison, presided when he entertained. 

Andrew Jackson's hostess was his wife's niece, Emily 
Donelson; and for Martin \'an Buren, his daughter-in- 
law, Angelica Singleton \'an Buren. The wife of Wil- 
liam Henr\- Harrison was too ill to travel to Washington, 
D.C. She sent their daughter-in-law, Jane Invin Har- 
rison, as hostess. John Tyler's wife died shortly after he 
became President. His daughter-in-law, Priscilla Cooper 
Tyler, and later his daughter Letitia Tyler Semple, 
officiated until he remanied in 1844. 

Zachan,' Taylor's wife refused to attend social affairs. 
Her daughter, BetU' Bliss, presided for her. Millard 
FiUmore's daughter, Mary Abigail, served in place of 
her invalid mother. Harriet Lane, niece of James 
Buchanan, a bachelor, served as his hostess. Martha 
Johnson Patterson, the daughter of Andrew Johnson, 
presided in place of his invalid wife. Hostess for 
Chester Arthur was his sister Mary Arthur McElroy. 
Rose Cleveland. Grover Cleveland's sister, was his 
hostess until he married in 1886. After the death of 
Woodrow Wilson's first wife, his daughter Margaret 
officiated until he remarried in 1915. Helen e. Marshall 

See also the section on Life in the White House in 
articles on those Presidents mentioned above; for exam- 
ple, Jefferson, Thom.as (Life in the White House). 

WHITE LEAD (chemical formula, 2PbC03-Pb(OH)2) 
is a pigment widely used to make white paint. There 
are several processes for preparing white lead. The old- 
est, called the Dutch method, produces white lead in 
powder fonn in about three months. La\ers of sheet lead 
are placed in earthen pots that contain a %veak solution 
of acetic acid. The pots are then buried in spent tan- 
bark, which ferments, producing heat and carbon 
dioxide. The heat turns the acetic acid to vapor. This 
and the carbon dio.xide act on the lead to produce white 
lead. The powder is then ground in linseed oil. 

The Dutch process takes more time. But it is believed 
to produce the best grade of white lead. 

Gases that contain sulfur compounds turn w'hite lead 
black. Paints made with white lead last a long time. 
The pigment also makes up the body of many light- 
colored paints. George L. Bush 

WHITE MAGIC, according to primitive belief, is the 
use of supernatural powers for a good purpose. It is 
considered tlie opposite of black magic. 

WHITE MATTER. See Brain (Gray and White Matter); 
Nervois S'l'STEM (The Central Nervous Svstem). 

WHITE MOUNTAIN, BATTLE OF. See Thirtv Ye.^rs' 
War (1 he Bohemian Period). 

243 



WHITE MOUNTAINS 

WHITE MOUNTAINS arc part of the Appalachian 
Mountain system. They stretch in a south\s-estern di- 
rection from Maine into New Hampshire. The White 
Moimtains received their name because their rocky 
summits appear white when they reflect sunlight. For 
location, see New Hampshire (physical map). 

The White Mountains cover about 1,000 square 
miles. Few people live in the mountain area because 
of the rugged terrain and lack of good farmland. The 
\Vhite Mountains include a niniiber of ranges. The 
Presidential Range in New Hampshire is the most im- 
portant of these. The chief mountains in the Presi- 
dential Range bear the names of early Presidents of the 
United States. Mount Washington (6.288 feet) is the 
highest peak in New Hampshire. Sixts'-eight of the 
other peaks in the White Mountains are over 3,900 feet. 

Deep canyons called "notches" cut through the 
\\'hite Mountains. The best known of these are the 
Carter, Crawford, Dixville, Franconia, Kinsman, and 
Pinkham. The famous "Old Man of the Mountain" 
is a feature of Profile Mountain in Franconia Notch. 
Wind and rain have carved a remarkable natural profile 
of a man's face on this cliff. Nathaniel Hawthorne im- 
mortalized the profile in his story, "The Great Stone 
Face." See Profile Mountaln. 

Since 1911, much of the White Mountains area has 
been included in a national forest. State forests have 
helped preserve two of the notches. Crawford was es- 
tablished in 191 1, and Franconia in 1925. 

A nonprofit organization, called Mt. Washington 
Observatory, Inc.. keeps daily records of temperature, 
wind velocity, and radioactive "fallout" in the moun- 
tains. On Apr. 12, 1934, the observatory recorded a 
wind of 231 miles an hour, the highest wind velocity 
ever recorded on earth. Since 1955, Mount Washington 
has been a testing site for cloud seeding to produce rain- 
fall. J. DUANE SqtnRES 

See also Mount Washington. 

Profile Mountoin Is in the White Mountains. 

New England Council 




WHITE MOUNTAINS 

WHITE MOUNTAINS. See Arizona (Places to 
Visit). 

WHITE PAPER is a British government report or 
policy statement on an important subject. It is a com- 
mon name for command papers (documents technically 
submitted to the House of Commons on "command of 
the Crown"). The British called these documents ivhite 
papers because many were prepared hastily and sub- 
mitted to the House of Commons without the traditional 
blue cover used for important documents. The United 
States government docs not use the term officially. But 
certain U.S. documents are popularly referred to as 
"white ixipers," such as the China White Paper of 1949. 

WHITE PLAGUE. See Tuberculosis. 

WHITE PLAINS, N.Y. (pop. 50,485; alt. 200 ft.), a 
residential suburb, lies about 23 miles northeast of 
New \'ork CUty. About one-fifth of the working popula- 
tion of White Plains works in New York City. 

White Plains was established in 1683. On July 9, 
1 776, the Provincial Congress of New York voted for the 
Declaration of Independence there. White Plains was 
incorporated as a village in 1866 and became a city 
in 1916. It has a commission government, and is the 
seat of Westchester County. William e. Voung 

WHITE PLAINS, BATTLE OF, was one of the early 
battles of the Revolutionary War. It was fought near 
White Plains, N.Y., on Oct. 28, 1776. British troops 
under General Sir William Howe attacked General 
George Washington's positions strongly, and forced him 
to retreat a short distance to the northwest. 

WHITE RIVER rises in the Boston Mountains in north- 
western Arkansas. It flows northeast into Missouri, 
where the waters are dammed at Table Rock and Lake 
Taneycomo dams. The river then re-enters -Arkansas. 
It joins the Mississippi River near Rosedale, Miss. 
Near its mouth, a channel joins it to the .Arkansas 
River. The river is about 690 miles long and is navigable 
to some extent below Batesville, .Ark. It is also dammed 
by Beaver and Bull Shoals dams in Arkansas. For 
location, see Arkansas (color map). Walti.r i,. Brown 

WHITE RUSSIAN SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLIC. 
See Byelorussia. 

WHITE SANDS MISSILE RANGE, N.Mex., is the 
largest all-land rocket testing range in the United 
States. The United States .Army operates it for all the 
armed services to test and develop rockets and guided 
missiles. The range covers 2,226,013 acres in south- 
central New Mexico. It extends 120 miles from north to 
south, and 40 miles from east to west. Its headquarters 
lie 50 miles southwest of .Alamogordo, N. Mex. Major 
commands located there include the army's missile 
test center, electronic research and developmental ac- 
tivity, and the navy's ordnance missile test facility. The 
air force missile development center lies on the east side 
of the range (see Holloman .Air Force B.ask). The 
army established the White Sands Proving Ground in 
1945 and renamed it in 1958. See also Guided Missile; 
New Mexico (color picture). Sami-el j. ziskind 

WHITE SANDS NATIONAL MONUMENT is in south- 
ern New Mexico. It contains great deposits of wind- 
blown gypsum sand. In bright light, the sands resemble 
a vast snowfield. The 146.535.34-acre monument was 
established in 1933. See New Me.xico (color picture). 



WHITE SEA, called Beloye More in Russia, is an arm 
of the .\rctic Ocean. It reaches into the northern part 
of Russia. For location, see Russia (color map). The 
Onega, Dvina, and Mezen rivers flow into the White 
Sea. Onega and Archangel are the largest cities on this 
sea. The sea is icebound from .September until June, 
but shipping is heavy in summer. The Dvina, Volga, 
and Dnepr rivers link the sea to the Caspian and Black 
seas. The Norwegian explorer, Ottar, discovered the 
White Sea in the a.d. BOO's. John D. Isaacs 

WHITE SULPHUR SPRINGS, W.Va. (pop. 2,676; 
alt. 2,000 ft.), named for its mineral springs, is a famous 
health resort. It lies about 120 miles east of Charleston, 
West \'irginia"s state capital (see West Virgini.\ [map]). 
White .Sulphur .Springs has a mayor-council form of 
government. 

.Settlers first came to the region about 1 750. Fashion- 
able people of the Old South visited the springs as early 
as 1 779. .After the resort became famous, its President's 
Cottage served as the summer home of Presidents Martin 
Van Buren, John Tyler, and Millard Fillmore. During 
the Civil War, soldiers fought the Batde of Dry Creek 
near the resort. F. P. Summers 

WHITE WALNUT. .See Butternut. 
WHITE WHALE. See Beluga. 
WHITE WOLF. See Arctic Wolf. 
WHITE WOMAN OF THE GENESEE. See Jembon, 
Mary. 

WHITEAKER, JOHN. See Oregon (Historv). 
WHITEFIELD, HUTI field, GEORGE (1714-1770), a 
British clergyman, helped John and Charles Wesley 
found Methodism. He was 
famous as a preacher. At 
Oxford University, he 
joined John Wesley's 
"Holy Club." After a mis- 
sionary trip to Georgia, he 
began to preach Wesley's 
Methodist doctrines. He 
broke with Wesley on theo- 
logical issues, but later they 
were friends again. 

Whitefield was born in 

Gloucester. He preached 

throughout England and 

Ireland, and made seven 

trips to America, founding 

an orphanage near Savannah, Ga. He died and was 

buried at Newburyport, Mass. F. A. Norwood 

See also Methodists; Wesley; Georgia (Places to 

Visit [Beihesda]); Gre.\t Awakening. 

WHITEFISH is the name of a group of fishes that live 
in fresh water, particularly the lakes and streams of the 
northern regions of North America, Europe, and Asia. 
The whitefishes are related to the salmon family. They 
are among the most important food fishes found in fresh 
water. The common whitefish of the northern American 
lakes is the most valuable of the whitefishes. The com- 
mon whitefish has a long body, a cone-shaped snout, 
and a forked tail. The mouth is toothless and its upper 
jaw projects beyond the lower jaw. The average white- 
fish weighs 4 pounds. It feeds on insects and shellfish 
and usually lives in deep water. 

The so-called "herring" of the Great Lakes is a mem- 
ber of the whitefish family. It is also a fine food fish, and 




George Whitefield 



244 



is more abundant than the common whitefish. Anothcf 
excellent food fish is the mountain ivhilefish. It lives in 
many western mountain streams. The Menowime 
whitefish is a commercialK- valuable fish that lives in 
the lakes of New England and the Adirondacks, in the 
Great Lakes, and in Alaskan waters. 

Many steps are taken to protect the common white- 
fish in the waters of the Great Lakes. This fish lays 
millions of eggs, but these eggs are eaten by yellow 
perch, crawfish, wild birds, and other creatures. Federal 
and state fishery departments grow the fish in hatcheries 
and plant them in lakes to keep up their numbers. The 
fish are mostly caught by the use of gill nets and trap 
nets, but pound nets also are used. 

Scientific Classificalion. Whitclish make up the family 
Coregoiiidae. The common whitefish is ijenus Coregonus, 
species C. clupeiformis. The lake herring, or Cisco, is Leucich- 
ihys arledi\ the mountain whitefish, Prosopium wil/iamsotir, 
the Menominee whitefish, P. ijuiidiilntrralf. Carl L. hubbs 

WHITEHEAD, ALFRED NORTH (1861-1947), was a 
British mathematician and philosopher. His first book. 
Treatise on Universal Algebra with Applications (1898), 
explained and extended ideas in abstract algebra and 
symbolic logic. These ideas, developed from earlier 
work of Grassmann and Boole, were soon put to work 
by physicists. 

The work of the Italian mathematician, Giuseppe 
Peano, stimulated Whitehead and Bertrand Russell, one 
of his students, to write their Print ipia Malhematica 
(1910-1913). This has been one of the most influential 
books of all time on the logic of mathematics. 

Whitehead was born at Ramsgate. He studied at 
Cambridge L'niversity, and taught there from 1910 to 
1924, when he became a professor of philosophy at 
Harvard L^niversity. L'ntil his death, he lived in the 
L'nited .States and wrote much of the philosophy for 

which he became well-known. Phillip S. Jones 

WHITEHEAD, ROBERT. .See Gyroscope (History). 

WHITEHEAD, WILLIAM. See Poet Laureate. 

WHITEHORSE, Yukon Territory (pop. 5,031; alt. 
2,083 ft.), is the territory's capital and chief distribu- 
tion and communication center. Whitehorse lies on 
the Yukon River, 1 1 1 miles north of Skagway, Alaska. 
Whitehorse is the northern terminal of the White Pass 
and Yukon Railway. It is also located on the Alaska 
Highway. The city has headquarters of tlie Northwest 
Highway System, Ro&gt;al Canadian Air Force, and 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Mining products 
taken from rich mineral deposits nearby are shipped 
from Whitehorse to outside markets. The surrounding 
region contains many bears, moose, and other game 
animals. Lake trout and grayling swim in neighboring 
streams and lakes. For location, see Yukon (map). 

Airlines link Whitehorse with cities in Canada and 
the United States. A dam built above Whitehorse Rap- 
ids in 1959 to furnish power has created a lake in Miles 
Canyon. Many gold seekers came past Whitehorse in 
the rush of 1897-1898. w. d. MacBridf, 

WHITEMAN, PAUL (1890- ), is an American 
orchestra conductor. He has often been called "King 
of Jazz." In 1919 Whiteman introduced the first ''sym- 
phonic jazz." Later he conducted the first performances 
of such compositions as George Gershwin's Rhapsody in 
Blue ( 1 924) and Ferde Grofe's Grand Canyon Suite ( 1 93 1 ), 
both of which show jazz influences. Whiteman was born 



WHITMAN, MARCUS 

in Denver, Colo., and played first viola in the Denver 
Symphony Orchestra while still in his teens. Not long 
after World War I, he formed his own orchestra and 
toured the United States and Europe. In the 1930's, 
Whiteman became a popular conductor on radio pro- 
grams. In 1943 he became musical director of the Blue 
Network, which later became the American Broad- 
casting Companv. Dwid Ewen 

WHITESTONE HILL. See North Dakota (Interesting 
Places to \'isit). 

WHITEWASH is a white mixture made from whiting, 
glue, water, common salt, rice flour, and unslaked lime. 
It is used instead of paint to put a coating on basement 
walls, the walls of lighthouses, the inside walls of barns, 
fences, and other spots where a clear white is desired and 
where paint is too expensive to be practical. Whitewash 
is applied with a bmsh, in much the same manner as 
paint. A heavy coating of whitewash over rough mortar 
plaster closes the pores of the plaster against moisture 
and dirt. John R. Koch 

WHITEWEED. See Daisy. 

WHITEWOOD is a name given several trees with light- 
colored wood, especially the basswood, Cottonwood, and 
tulip trees. See Basswood; Cottonwood; Tulip Tree. 

WHITING. See Chalk. 

WHITING, a fish. See Hake. 

WHITLOW, inrir loh, is a painful, inflamed condi- 
tion of the fingers, and sometimes of the toes. It is one 
form of the infection known as felon. A whitlow gener- 
ally forms dark tissue around and under the nail. 
LTsually, it is caused by septic material that has entered 
through a small wound or pin prick. One type of whit- 
low is at the surface, and another is deep. The deep kind 
generally requires an incision, sometimes to the bone. 
Hot packs should be used at once, and if there is pus it 
should be drained off. Whitlows may last only a few 
days, or for weeks or months. If home treatment does 
not help, a physician should be called. p.\ul r. Cannon 

WHITMAN,' MARCUS (1802-1847), was an American 
pioneer, doctor, and niis- 
sionaiy among the Indians. 
Appointed as a Presby- 
terian missionary physician 
to Oregon by the American 
Board for Foieign Missions, 
he visited the Pacific North- 
west with Samuel Parker in 

1835. He returned there in 

1836, with his wife, the 
Reverend Heniy Spalding 
and his wife, and W. H. 
Gray. They established two 
missions, one near the site 
of the present city of Walla 
Walla, Wash. 

They drove their wagon 
as far as Fort Boise, and 
thus were credited with 
opening that part of the 
wagon road to Oregon. In 
the winter of 1842, Whit- 
man rode to the East to gain 
further missionaiy support, 



Marcus Whitman 



visual Educ 




WHITMAN, NARCISSA 

and to tr)' to encourage emigration to Oregon. He also 
hoped to interest tlie federal government in settling the 
Oregon country. 

The new settlers of 1847 brought with them an epi- 
demic of measles that caused the death of many Indian 
children. The missionaries' medicine did not help ihem. 
In 1847. a band of Cayuse Indians, who probably be- 
lieved their children were poisoned, attacked the mis- 
sion. They killed Whitman, his wife, and 12 other per- 
sons, and burned all the buildings. Whitman was born 
in Rushville, N.Y. He practiced medicine for eight 
years before becoming a missionary'. Thomas d. Clark 

See also Washington (Interesting Places to \'isit); 
Whitman, Narcissa; Whitman Mission National 
Historic Site. 

WHITMAN, NARCISSA (1808-1847), was a mission- 
ary teacher to the Indians of the Pacific Northwest. 
In 1 836 she married the famous Presbyterian missionan,-, 
Marcus Whitman, and became one of the first two white 
women to journey overland to the Northwest. The cou- 
ple began a mission among the Cayuse Indians at 
Waiilatpu in 1837. The Whitmans and 12 other mission- 
aries were massacred by the Indians on Nov. 29, 1847. 
Mrs. Whitman was born in Prattsburg, N.Y. See also 

WhITM.XN, Marcus. Earle E. Cairns 

WHITMAN, WALT (1819-1892), was one of the great- 
est of .'\merican poets. His poems sing the praises of 
America and democrac\', and many Europeans consider 
him the national poet of America. 

His Early Life. Whitman was born on May 31, 1819, 
at West Hills, Long Island, N.Y. He attended school 
in Brooklyn, N.Y., and, at the age of 13, became an 
apprentice in a newspaper and print shop there. Later 
he taught school, and worked as a typesetter and printer 
for several small newspapers on Long Island. At the age 
of 1 9 he published a short-lived weekly newspaper. The 
Long htander, which he wrote, printed, and delivered 
himself For a short time in 1842, he edited a daily 
newspaper, the Aurora, in New York City. 

From 1846 to 1848, Whitman edited the Brooklyn 
Eagle. In this newspaper, his articles on political ques- 
tions, civic affairs, education, public health, the status 
of women, prison reform, books, music, and the theater 
reflected his widespread interests. He passionately op- 
posed the breakup of the Union, and his violent attacks 
on slaver)' finally cost him his job. After a few weeks in 
New Orleans as a newspaperman, he returned to Brook- 
lyn to take an even greater part in the antislavery "Free 
Soil" movement as editor of The Freeman. 

From 1848 to 1855, Whitman worked on the poems 
for Leaves of Grass. Long before he had settled on the 
pattern of the book, much of its content and some of its 
form had appeared in his newspaper writing and in his 
notebooks. During these years he was an active member 
of debating societies. He also attended theaters, con- 
certs, lectures, and political meetings. He had a great 
love for crowds of all sizes. He enjoyed a clambake as 
much as an opera, and wrote of both. He was always 
more interested in the people than in the occasion. 
Whitman often rode on stagecoaches or ferries just to 
talk with the drivers, boatmen, and passengers. 

His Poems. Out of this richly balanced experience 
came Leaves oj Grass. The fust edition in 1 855 was only 

246 




Walt Whitman received literary acclaim from English writers 
long before American critics recognized him as a great poet. 



a thin volume of 95 pages. Twelve pages were a remark- 
able preface in which the poet said "The L^nited States 
themselves are essentially the greatest poem." Leaves oj 
Glass was httle noticed at first, except for a prophetic 
letter from Ralph Waldo Emerson, who told Whitman, 
"I greet you at the beginning of a great career." 

Until his death, Whitman worked on Leaves of Grass 
and on such prose as Democratic I'istas (1871). At least 
nine different editions of Leaves of Grass were printed 
during his lifetime. Each new edition included poems 
that previously had appeared only in periodicals or in 
smaller collections of his verse, such as Drum-Taps 
(1865). The final edition included such poems as "Song 
of Myself," "Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rocking," 
"Passage to India," and "Pioneers O Pioneers!" It also 
has two well-known poems on the death of Abraham 
Lincoln, "When Lilacs Last in the Doonard Bloom'd" 
and "O Captain! My Captain!" The unusual meters in 
his poetry shocked many early readers. But this rhyth- 
mical freedom was part of the mystical scope of his 
ideas. Biblical and oratorical rhythms are basic to his 
verse. The cadence of his lines suggests the rise and fall 
of the sea he loved so much. 

His Philosophy. Whitman's work has greatly influ- 
enced poets, critics, and students of contemporaiy soci- 
ety. He held lofty convictions about "the American 
idea . . . the Great Idea, the idea of perfect and free 
individuals." His love of America grew from a faith that 
he shared with many people of his time. This faith 
was that Americans might reach both material and 
spiritual heights that were as yet unknown. Whitman 
said, "The chief reason for the being of the United 
States of America is to bring about the common good 
will of all mankind, the solidarity of the world." 



His Later Life. At the outbreak of the Civil War, 
Whitman was still living in Brooklyn, supporting his 
mother and a crippled brotlier. Another brother, George, 
volunteered, and fought with distinction in several 
battles as a Union soldier. In 1863 he was wounded, 
and Walt went down to the battle front in Virginia to 
find him. By this time, George was recovering, but 
Walt's sympathy for the sick and wounded was so 
aroused that he volunteered his services in army hos- 
pitals for the remainder of the war. He supported him- 
self by newspaper correspondence, and recorded his ex- 
periences in Drum-Taps, later included in Leaves of Grass, 
and in his book of prose called Sptrimen Days(\88'2). 

After the war. Whitman worked in several govern- 
ment departments as a secretary, until he suffered a 
paralytic stroke in 1873, from which he never entirely 
recovered. After 1873 he lived in Camden, N.J., first 
with his brother George, and then in his own small 
house on Mickle .Street. He had won recognition in 
Europe, and many famous men visited him. Full recog- 
nition in the United .States did not come until after his 
death, but today Leaves of Grass is almost universally 
recognized as a masterpiece. Oay Wilson allen 

See also Camden. 

WHITMAN COLLEGE is a privately controlled coedu- 
cational school of liberal arts and sciences at Walla 
Walla, Wash. Courses lead to bachelor of arts and 
bachelor of music degrees. Whitman is the oldest college 
in Washington. It was founded in 1859. For enrollment, 
see Universities and Colleges (table). 

WHITMAN MISSION NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE is 
in southeastern Washington. It includes the site of an 
Indian mission and school established in 1836 by Mar- 
cus Whitman and his wife. The mission was a landmark 
on the Oregon Trail, and the school was the first mission 
school in the Pacific Northwest. The 95.84-acre area 
was established as a national monument in 1940. 

WHITNEY, ELI (1765-1825), an American inventor, 
has two claims to fame. His cotton gin made cotton- 
growing profitable, and helped make the United .States 
the largest cotton producer in the world. His method of 
making guns by machinery marked the beginning of 
mass production in the United .States. 

Early Life. Whitney was born on Dec. 8, 1765, in 
Westboro, Mass., the son of a farmer. Even as a boy he 
showed mechanical aptitude. He made a violin when he 



WHITNEY, ELI 

was 12. During the Revolutionary War, when he was 
still in his teens, he had his own business, making hand- 
wrought nails. After the war, times were hard. Whitney 
did not have the money to go to college. He taught 
school for five years, at $7,00 a month, entered Yale 
College at 23, and was graduated in 1 792. 

He then went to Georgia to teach and study law. 
When he got there, he found another man had the 
job. General Nathanael Greene's widow invited him 
to be her guest while he studied law. Whitney wanted 
to be "worth his keep"' and began fixing things 
around the house. His mechanical talent must have 
impressed her. One night some guests were talking 
of green seed cotton. They could not grow it profitably 
because of the time needed to clean it. Mrs. Greene 
said, "Mr. Whitney can make a machine to clean it." 
By .'^pril, 1 793, Whitney had built a machine, the cot- 
ton gin, that could clean cotton as fast as 50 men work- 
ing by hand. 

His Inventions. Whitney applied for a patent on his 
machine. With the backing of a partner, Phineas Miller, 
he began making gins in New Haven, Conn. Then 
trouble began. It took almost a year to get the patent. 
Whitney could not make gins fast enough to meet the 
demand; and then the factory burned. .Soon men were 
making and using imitations of his machine. Whitney 
sued them, .\fter long years of court trials, he won. The 
courts declared he had the sole right to his patent. But 
the life of the patent had almost am out. He pleaded 
for a renewal of the patent, but the United States Con- 
gress refused to grant it. 

In 1 798 Whitney built another factory near New 
Haven and began to make muskets by a new method. 
Until then, each gun had been handmade by a skilled 
craftsman, and no two guns were alike. Whitney in- 
vented tools and machines so that unskilled wor .iien 
could turn out absolutely uniform parts. Setting up the 
machinery took time. The government grew impatient, 
and asked for the guns. Whitney amazed government 
representatives by assembling guns from pieces chosen 
at random from piles of parts. Eventually, his arms fac- 
tory made him rich. But his role as the father of mass 
production is almost unknown. Jean Lee Latham 

See also Cotton Gin; Mass Production. 

Blown Bros.: Culver 



Eli Whitney, betow, invented 
the cotton gin in 1 793. It sepa- 
rated the cotton fibers from 
the green seed, right 







WHITNEY, MOUNT 

WHITNEY, MOUNT. See Mount Whitney. 
WHITSUNDAY. Sec Pentecost. 
WHITTAKER, CHARLES EVANS (1901- ), was a 
justice of the Supreme Court of the United States 
from 1957 to 1962, when he resigned because of poor 
health. President Dwight D. Eisenhower nominated him 
as a United States District Judge for the Western Dis- 
trict of Missouri in 1954, and two years later he became 
a judge of the United States Court of Appeals, Eighth 
Circuit. Whittaker was born on a farm in Doniphan 
County, Kansas, and attended a rural school. As a 
youth he trapped animals and sold their pelts to earn 
S700 for his law studies. Merlo j. Pusey 

WHITTAKER, JAMES WARREN (1929- ), became 
the first American to reach the summit of Mount Ever- 
est. He reached the lop of the world's highest peak on 
May 1 , 1963, with Sherpa guide Nawang Gombu. They 
were the first of three United States climbing teams to 
scale the 29,028-foot peak in a single month. Whittaker 
was born in Seattle, Wash. He began climbing as a Boy 
Scout. He served as a mountain guide in the United 
States before the Everest expedition. 

WHITTIER, Calif, (pop. 33,663; alt. 45 ft.), lies 15 miles 
southeast of Los Angeles. Factories there produce oil 
well supplies, food products, and auto parts. Whittier 
College is located there. The city was foimded in the 
1880's as a Quaker community and named for the poet 
John Greenleaf Whittier. Whittier was incorporated in 
1898. It has a council-manager government. For loca- 
tion, see California (inset on political ma|)). 

WHITTIER, HU-ir ih ur, JOHN GREENLEAF (1807- 
1892), was one of the best-known American poets. His 
life and his poetry were closely connected with his 
Quaker faith, and he was called the Quaker Poet. 
His religious beliefs made him a bitter enemy of slaveiy. 
His poems fall into two groups, those attacking slaveiy, 
and those praising the charms of New England countiy 
life. Snow-Bound(\?&gt;&amp;fi) is considered his best poem. 

Whittier was born on Dec. 17, 1807, at East Haver- 
hill, Mass. He received little education, and the only 
book he had was the Bible. When he was about 14, 
his teacher read him the 
poems of Robert Burns. 
VVhittier loved these po- 
ems, and soon began to 
write verses himself When 
he was 18, his older sister 
sent one of his poems to the 
Newburyport Free Press, 
and it was published. The 
famous abolitionist editor, 
William Lloyd Garrison, 
encouraged him (see Gar- 
rison, William Lloyd). 

Whittier became the 
great poet of the Abolition- 
ist movement. He served a 
term in the Massachusetts legislature in 1835, but he re- 
fused a second term because of poor health. In 1843 he 
published Lays of My Home and Other Poems, and began 
to be recognized as one of the leading American poets. 
He published a collection of anlislavery poems. Voices of 
Freedom, in 1846. In the 1850's Whittier wrote "Maud 




John Greenleaf Whittier 



Muller," "Barefoot Boy," and many other poems of 
New England life. His "Song of \'ermonlers 1 779" is 
still sung by balladeers. Every hymnbook contains his 
beautiful "Dear Lord and Father of Mankind." 

Whittier's reputation declined, and by the middle 
1900's he was considered only a minor poet because his 
diction was often crude. His ballads are sometimes 
poorly rhymed and badly worded. But Whittier remains 
the fresh, unspoiled poet of children and country peo- 
ple. Even his dated political poems are still a significant 
part of American history. Peter Viereck 

See also Abolitionist; FRiETCHtE, Barbara; Lib- 
erty PARn'. 

WHITTIER COLLEGE. See Universities and Col- 
leges (table). 

WHITTINGTON, "DICK," RICHARD (1358?-1423), 

was an English merchant. According to a popular 

legend, he was apprenticed to a London merchant who 

was about to send cargo to _. , ,„..„. . 

,, , . ,f„ Diclc Whittington 

sell to a ioreign port. When n,„ivn ems. 

told he could send one of 
his own possessions, Whit- 
tington chose his cat. It 
proved to be the most valu- 
able item in the cargo. The 
king of Barbary, whose 
kingdom was overrun with 
rats, bought it for an enor- 
mous sum. 

In the meantime, Whit- 
tington had iTjn awa&gt;-. The 
captain returned with 
Whittington's money, but 
was unable to find him. As 
Whittington ran through 
Newgate, he thought he 
heard the Bow Bells ringing 
and saying, "Turn again, 
Whittington, Lord Mayor 
of London." He returned 
and learned of his good 
fortune. Later he was Lord 
Mayor of London three 

times. Knox Wilson 

WHITTLE, SIR FRANK 

(1907- ), became one of the leading pioneers in the 
development of the turbojet engine. His company, 
Powerjets, Limited, produced the Whittle engine. This 
engine powered Great Britain's first jet plane in 1941, 
and became the model for the first United States turbo- 
jets (see Jet Propulsion [Jets Put to Use]). 

Whittle was born in Coventry, England, the son of 
an inventor. He entered Leamington College on a 
scholarship at the age of 1 1, and enlisted in the Royal 
Air Force when he was 16. He distinguished himself 
in a mechanics course and was assigned to officers' 
flight training. He became interested in light turbine 
engines and received his first patent in 1930 after the 
Air Ministry turned down his jet engine proposals. 

Whittle's basic patents lapsed in 1935 because he did 
not have enough money to pay patent fees. Later that 
year, a group of engineers became interested in his work 
and, with the government and Whittle, formed Power- 
jets, Ltd., to produce engines. Whittle was knighted in 

1948. Robert B. HOTZ 




248 



WHITTLING. See Tree (Interesting Tree Hobbies); 
Wood Carvtng. 

WHITWORTH, SIR JOSEPH (1803-1887), was a British 
mechanical engineer and inventor. He invented measur- 
ing machines and found a method of milling and testing 
plane surfaces. He introduced a system of standard 
measures, gauges, and screw threads. His experiments 
in ordnance established principles of gim design that 
were adopted by all major countries except his own. 
Whitworth was born in Stockport. England. He founded 
a company that became a leader in tool design and 

manufacture. Robert E. Schofield 

WHITWORTH COLLEGE is a coeducational, privately 
controlled, liberal arts school at Spokane, Wash. It 
offers master's degrees in education and in Christian 
education. The college \vas founded in 1890. For 
enrollment, see Unr.'ersities and Colleges (table). 

WHO. See \Vorld Health Organization. 

WHOLE WHEAT. See Bread; Flour (Kinds of Flour). 

WHOLESALER. See Distribution (Distribution of 
Goods). 

WHOOPING COUGH, HOOP ing, is a highly conta- 
gious disease which affects children more often than 
adults. Doctors often call the disease pertussis. It is more 
serious than most persons think. Whooping cough kills 
many persons eveiy year by bringing on bronchitis, 
pneumonia, hemorrhage, or convulsions. 
i A person can catch whooping cough at any age, but 

! an adult has a better chance to recover than a child. 
[ The fatality rate for all ages together is 1 per cent but 
rises 10 to 25 per cent for children under four years of 
age. Two-thirds of all deaths occur in children under 
one year of age. One attack almost always makes the 
patient immune from other attacks. Jules Bordet, a Bel- 
gian bacteriologist, was the first to discover the germ 
that causes the disease. 

Early Symptoms of whooping cough are a slight fever 
and a dry cough. After a few days, the symptoms gro\v 
woree, particularly at night. The coughing comes in 
spells, or paroxysms, and usually causes vomiting. .\ny 
child who shows these signs should be kept away from 
otlier children. About a week later, most children 
coming down \sith the disease begin to give the whoop 
— a long drawing-in of the breath that sounds like 
a high crow. A doctor can recognize the disease 
earlier, in other ways. 

There are four or five coughing spells a day even in 
mild cases. More frequent attacks come from overeat- 
ing, cr\ing, excitement, or too violent exercise. The 
climax occurs about the end of the fourth week. Then 
the spells gradually grow fewer and less severe. Some- 
times, especially in cold weather, the whoop goes on for 
two or tfiree months. .\ny fever after the climax should 
be reported at once to the doctor. 

Treatment. If a child has whooping cough his mother 
must be careful to keep him away from other children. 
The disease spreads rapidly through the spray of drop- 
lets from the mouth and nose. This spray can travel up 
to 5 feet from ordinary' talking and up to 18 feet by 
coughing. During coughing attacks, the discharges 
from nose and mouth should be caught in a piece of 
cloth. The cloth should then be burned. The patient 
should haV'C his own dishes, silver, washcloths, and 
towels. It is important to give a child nourishing food, 
and to have the sleeping room well ventilated. 



WICHITA FALLS 

A rabbit serum and one made from human blood 
can be used in treating children. .Severely ill patients 
may need o.xygen. For specific treatment or prevention 
of complications, there are three antibiotic drugs: chlor- 
amphenicol, aureomyan, and terramycin. These may be 
given by mouth or b\' injection (see Antibiotic), Special 
care should be given to the diet. A patient should be 
isolated from others for about three weeks. 

.•\ vaccine which makes a person immune in 60 to 75 
per cent of cases has been developed. All infants should 
be immunized with the vaccine. .\ustin Edward s.MrrH 

.See also Disease (tables). 

WHOOPING CRANE. See Crane. 

WHORTLEBERRY. See Huckleberry. 

WHYMPER, EDWARD. See M.atterhorn. 

WICHITA, UlCH uh law (pop. 254.698; met. area 
381,626; alt. 1,290 ft.), is the largest city in Kansas. It 
serves as the distributing center for a large farming 
region that produces grains, livestock, and dairy prod- 
ucts. Wichita lies 200 miles southwest of Kansas 
City where the Litde Arkansas and Big Arkansas 
rivers meet (see Kansas [map]). It is the home of Friends 
University (Quaker) and the University of \\'ichita. 

Industry and Trade. Wichita is one of the leading 
farm-machiner\- distributing points in the United States. 
It has the largest market for broomcorn in the world. 
The city lies in the midcontinent oil fields, and has a 
number of petroleum refineries. McConnell .^ir Force 
Base lies 5 miles southeast of Wichita. During World 
War II, the four airplane factories in \Vichita produced 
more completed warplanes than those of an\' other city. 

.\fter the war, Wichita became one of the leading 
producers of jet bombere for the Air Force. More than 
500 factories make such products as oil-well equipment, 
lamps, stoves, refrigerator cars, and farm machineiy. 

Transportation. Five railroads, four airlines, and nu- 
merous motorbus and truck lines serve Wichita. The 
municipal airport covers an area of 1,890 acres. 

History. The site of Wichita was a buffalo-hunting 
ground for Plains Indians. It was named for the 
Wichita Indians, who once lived in the region. The 
first white men settled in Wichita in 1868. The village 
became an important shipping point for longhorn 
Texas cattle with the coming of the railroad in 1872. 
Wichita was incorporated as a town in 1870, and 
chartered as a city in 1886. It is the cotmty seat of Sedg- 
wick County. Tlie city has a council-manager form of 
goN'ernment. \Vilua.vi f. Zornow 

WICHITA, UNIVERSITY OF, is a coeducational school 
controlled by the city of Wichita, Kans. It has colleges 
of liberal arts and sciences, business administration and 
industry, education, adult education, and fine arts. 
It has a school of engineering and a graduate school. 
The university has a four-year program in aeronautical 
engineering and administration. The school was 
founded in 1895 as Fainnount College and became a 
municipal university in 1926. For enrollment, see Uni- 
\'ersities and Colleges (table). emory k. u,\douist 

WICHITA FALLS, Tex. (pop. 101,724; alt. 945 ft.), is 
headquarters for the oil industiy in north-central Texas. 
It is on the Wichita River about 110 miles north- 
west of Fort Worth. For location, see Texas (color map). 
The city is the home of Midwestern University, Wichita 



249 



WICKERSHAM, GEORGE WOODWARD 

Falls State Hospital, and Sheppard Air Force Base, a 
missile technical training center. 

Wichita Falls has oil refineries and oil-well-equipment 
factories. The city has one of the largest flour mills in the 
Southwest. Other leading industries produce leather 
goods, foundry products, air-conditioning equipment, 
cottonseed products, and various processed foods. 

Wichita Falls was established in 1882 as a station on 
the Fort Worth and Denver City Railroad. It was in- 
corporated as a city in 1889. The city adopted a council- 
manager form of government in 1928. n. Bahf.v Carroi i. 

WICKERSHAM, GEORGE WOODWARD (1858-1936), 
an American lawyer, served as Attorney General from 
1909 to 1913 in the Cabinet of President William How- 
ard Taft. He was interested in constitutional reform in 
New York state, and in international arbitration. In 
later years, he served as chairman of the National Com- 
mission on Law Observance and Enforcement. This 
commission was created in 1929 by President Herbert 
Hoover to study the problem of enforcing the national 
prohibition laws. Wickersham was born in Pittsburgh, 
Pa., and studied at Lehigh University. H. G. Reuschlein 

WICLIF, JOHN. See Wycliffe, John. 

WIDDEMER, MARGARET (1880?- ), is an Ameri- 
can poet and novelist. "Factories" (1915), a child-labor 
poem, was her first published poem. She shared the 
Poetry Society of America prize with Carl Sandbmg in 
1919. Her most recent books are Lady of the Mohawks, 
Prince in Buckskin, and The Golden Wildcat. She also 
wrote Binkie and the Bell Dolls and Little Boy and Girl 
Land. She was born in Doylestown, Pa. George j. Becker 

WIDGEON, WIJ un, is a river duck found in North 
America and in Europe. Hunters locate the American 
widgeon (baldpate) by its distinctive call, whew, whew, 
whew (see B.^ldpate). 

The European widgeon lives in the northern part of 
Europe, and occasionally in the Llnitcd States. Both 
species are about 19 inches long. The female lays 7 to 
12 creamy-while eggs in ground nests near water. 

Scientific Classification. Widgeons belong to the family 
Anatidae. The American widgeon is genus Mareca, species 
M. americana. The European widgeon is classified as M. 
peuelope. Joseph J. Hickey 

WIDGET. See Gremlin. 

WIDOW'S WALK. See Colonial Life in America 
(Homes of New England; picture, Colonial Houses). 

WIECHERT, ERNST. See German Literature (Ger- 
man Literature Today). 

WIELAND, VEE lahnt, CHRISTOPH MARTIN (1733- 
1813), a poet and novelist, returned grace and beauty 
to German verse. Influenced by the literature of 
France and ancient Greece, he became a "smiling 
philosopher." His best-known writings include the 
novel Agathon (1766-1767) and the ironical fairy-epic 
poem Oberon (1780). Between 1762 and 1766, he pub- 
lished translations of 22 of Shakespeare's plays. The 
translations introduced Shakespeare to Germany and 
influenced later German dramatists. Wieland was born 
at Oberholzheim, Wiirttemberg. After the success of 
The Golden Mirror (1772), he tutored Prince Karl Au- 
gust, later Duke of Saxe-Weimar. Wekner p. friederich 

WIELAND, VEE lahnt, HEINRICH OTTO (1877-1957), 
a German chemist, developed basic theories of the 




Diiuble.lay &amp; Co 

Norbert Wiener 



mechanism by which living cells produce energy by 
oxidation. His work on the structure of the bile acids 
and poisons produced by toads led to discoveries of the 
nature of hormones, vitamins, and other natural prod- 
ucts. Wieland won the 1927 Nobel prize for chemistry. 
He was born in Baden. henry m. Leicester 

WIEN, the official name for Vienna. See Vienna. 
WIENER, WEEnur, NORBERT (1894-1964), a mathe- 
matician and logician, had an important role in devel- 
oping high-speed electronic computers. He coined the 
word cybernetics, and used 
it as the title of a book he 
published in 1948 (see 
Cybernetics). During 
World War I, he worked 
as a coinputer at the Aber- 
deen(Md.) Proving 
Ground, and during World 
War II, he helped develop 
high-speed electronic com- 
puters. Wiener's nontech- 
nical books include The Hu- 
man Use oj Human Beings 
(1950), Ex-Prodigy (1953), 
and / am a Mathematician 
(1958). 
Wieirer was born in Columbia, Mo., and was rec- 
ognized as a child prodigy. He was graduated from 
Tufts College at 14. and received a Ph.D. from Harvard 
L'niversity at 18. He began teaching at the Massachu- 
setts Institute of Technology in 1919. Phili.ip s. Jones 
WIENIAWSKI, vyeh .hl'AHFskee, HENRI (1835-1880), 
one of the most celebrated violinists of the 1800's, has 
often been called the Chopin of the violin. His style 
reveals a full-blooded romantic temperament. He was 
also a composer. His works give the performer great 
opportunity for brilliant display. He composed Legende, 
Concerto .No. 2 in D minor for violin and orchestra, Sou- 
venir de Moscou, and a fantasy on Faust. Wieniawski 
was born in Lublin, Poland. Hans Rosenwald 

WIESBADEN, ('^^.S' bah duhn (pop. 253,300; met. 
area 500,000; alt. 361 ft.), is a resort 6 miles north of 
Mainz in West Germany. It is in a valley on the 
southern slope of the Taunus Mountains. For location, 
see Germany' (color map). Many mineral springs in and 
around ^Viesbaden attract visitors from all parts of the 
world. The tourist trade provides the chief source of in- 
come for the people. The springs in this area were 
known to the Romans, and many relics of the Roman 
period have been discovered there. The city's Latin 
name was Aquae Mattiacum, meaning water of the .Matti- 
aci (a German tribe). Its German name, Wiesbaden, 

means baths on the meadows. James K. Pollock 

WIESE, VEE zuh, KURT (1887- ), an American 
artist and writer, illustrated more than 100 books. He 
began to draw while a World War I prisoner of the 
Japanese. He wrote and illustrated The Chinese Ink 
Stick (1929), Karoo the Kangaroo (1929), Liartg and La 
(1930), and I'ou Can Write Chinese (1945). His animal 
pictures for Felix Salten's Bambi (1932) were memo- 
rable. He was born in Minden, Germany. Norman Rice 

■See also Kipling, Rudyard (picture); Literature 
FOR Children (American Illustrators; picture, Young 
Fu Watches His Father). 

WIFE. See Family; Marriage. 



250 



WIG is a false covering of iiair for the head. The name 
comes from the word periwig. The custom of wearing 
wigs dates back to ancient times. Eg\'ptian mummies 
have been found with them. The ancient Greeks and 
Romans wore them. In the 1700's, the French made 
wigs a fashionable item of dress. Wigs then became 
large and heavy, and expensive. Usually they were pow- 
dered white. Wigs were worn by nobles and great 
ladies, courtiers, ministers, judges, doctors, and pro- 
fessional men. English judges began wearing wigs in 
the days of Queen Anne and still wear them today. 
Wigs were popular in colonial America, and were con- 
sidered stylish among women in tJie 1960's. They are 
also worn by many persons who have lost their natural 
hair. Quality wigs are made of the best grade of human 
hair. Wigmakers also make toupees (small hairpieces 
used to cover bald spots). M.\Ry Eva.ns 

WIGGIN, KATE DOUGLAS (1856-1923), was an 
American writer and educator. She was perhaps best 
known as the author of The Birds' Christmas Caro/ (1888), 
her first successful stor&gt;', and Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm 
(1903), one of the most 
popular children's books 
of its time. She and her 
sister, Nora Archibald 
Smith, published several 
collections of folk tales, 
fairy stories, and fables. 

Kate Douglas Wiggin 
was born in Philadelphia. 
She went to Santa Barbara, 
Calif., to teach at the age 
of 17. In 1878, she organ- 
ized in San Francisco the 
first free kindergarten west 
of the Rocky Mountains. 
Two years later, she found- 
ed the California Kindergarten Training School. She 
published her autobiography. My Garden of Memory, in 
^y^-^. Evelyn Ray Sickels 

WIGGLESWORTH, MICHAEL. See American Lit- 
erature (Colonial Poetry). 

WIGHT, wite, ISLE OF, lies off the southern coast of 
England. For location, see England (map). The strait 
called The Solent separates the little island from the 
mainland county of Hampshire. The island covers 147 
square miles, and has a population of about 94,000. 

The Isle of W'ight is famous for its mild, pleasant 
climate and its scener)', which attracts many tourists. 
The island's chief town is Newport. Cowes, its leading 
port, is known for its yacht races. The chief industries 
are farming and sheep raising. Frederjck g. Marcham 

WIGHTMAN, HAZEL HOTCHKISS. See Tennis (Fa- 
mous Tennis Players). 

WIGMAN, MARY. See Dancing (Modern Dance). 

WIGNER, UIG nuhr, EUGENE PAUL (1902- ), is 
an American physicist. He worked with Enrico Fermi 
when Fermi produced the first nuclear chain reaction in 
1 942. Wigner developed many practical uses for atomic 
energy. He won the Atomic Energy Commission's 
Enrico Fermi award in 1958, and shared the 1959 Atoms 
for Peace award with Leo Szilard. He shared the 1963 
Nobel prize in physics with J. Hans D. Jensen and Ma- 
ria Mayer. Wigner was born in Budapest, Hungary, and 
became a U.S. citizen in 1937. He became a professor 




Courtesy of Houghton Mifflin C 

Kate Douglas Wiggin 



WILBERFORCE 

of mathematical physics at Princeton L'niversity in 
1938. See also Szilard, Leo. Aaron j. ihde 

WIGWAGGING is a method of signaling with flags. 
Unlike semaphore, wigwagging uses only one flag (see 
.Sem.^phore). The three motions used in wigwagging 
represent a dot, a dash, and the end of a word or para- 
graph. Messages are made by combining these motions. 
See also Flag (color picture, Flags That Talk); Signal- 
ing (Flag Hoists). 

WIGWAM is the name for a kind of dwelling used by 
the .Algonkian-speaking Indians of the eastern wood- 
lands. In the East, the foundation was usually made of 
light poles tied together with bark, forming an oval- 
shaped dome. The covering was layers of bark or per- 
haps reed mats, laid on like shingles. Other wigwams 
had a rectangular frame and gabled roof .Some north- 
ern Algonkians used a cone-shaped tent. Ruth m. Underhill 

See also Indian, American (color picture, Eastern 
Woodsmen). 

WILBERFORCE is the family name of two noted Eng- 
lishmen, the father a statesiTian, the son a clergyman. 

William Wilberforce (1759-1833) was a leader in the 
fight to abolish the slave trade and slaver\' in the British 
Empire. In 1 780, he entered Parliament and became a 
leading Tory, noted for his eloquence. In 1 786, Thomas 
Clarkson asked him to join in attacking slavery in the 
West Indies. The reformers decided to attack the slave 
trade first. Wilberforce, supported by William Pitt, led 
the first campaign in Parliament in 1789 (see Pitt 
[family]). The bill to end the slave trade passed the 




William Wilberforce 



Brown Bros- 

Samuel Wilberforce 



House of Commons in 1792, but failed in the House of 
Lords. When such a bill became law in 1807, Wilberforce 
turned on slavery itself He retired from Parliament in 
1825, but continued to support emancipation. Wilber- 
force was born at Hull on Aug. 24, 1759, and studied 
at Cambridge University. 

Samuel Wilberforce (1805-1873), the third son of 
William \Vilberforce, gave new vitality to the Church of 
England. As Bishop of Oxford and then of Winchester, 
he held key positions during the crisis created by the 
conversion of John Henry Newman to the Roman 
Catholic Church. Wilberforce stood outside the Trac- 
tarian, or Oxford, Movement (see Oxford Move- 
ment). But he advocated strengthening the Church of 
England ritual and tradition. He was in great demand 
as a speaker. Bishop Wilberforce was born in London 
on Sept. 7, 1805. loots filler 



251 



WILBERFORCE UNIVERSITY 

WILBERFORCE UNIVERSITY is a coeducational 
school operated by the African Methodist Episcopal 
Church in Wilberforce, Ohio. It has a college of liberal 
arts and Payne Theological Seminar)'. Wilberforce 
grants bachelor's degrees in arts, sciences, and divinity. 
Founded in 1856, VVilberforce is the oldest Negro uni- 
versity in the United States. The church has operated 
it since 1863. For enrollment, see Universities and 
Colleges (table). rembert stores 

WILBUR, RICHARD (1921- ), an American poet, 
won the 1957 Puliuer prize for poetry. He began wiiting 
poetry during World War II. His books include The 
Beautiful Changes (]947), Ceremony (1950), and Things of 
This World (1956). He translated Moliere's Misanthrope 
in 1955. Wilbur was born in New York City, and was 
graduated from Amherst College. John Holmes 

WILBUR CROSS PARKWAY. See Ro.^ds and High- 
ways (.Some Iinpurlant Roads [Merritt and Wilbur]). 

WILD, JONATHAN (lb82?-1725). was an English 
thief whose name has been preserved in English litera- 
ture. He was a London buckle maker who turned thief 
He organized a band of robbers who stole for him. He 
also set up a company to dispose of the stolen goods. 
Wild was hanged. Daniel Defoe and Henry Fielding 
wrote about his career. Knox Wilson 

WILD ANIMAL. See .Animal; Wildlife Conserva- 
tion. 

WILD ASS. See Donkey. 

WILD BARLEY is a troublesome weed related to the 
grass family. It grows in various parts of the North 
American continent. The plant has a slender, rounded 
stem that grows about 2 feet tall. The spikes of the 
flowers develop a bristly beard around them. Because 
this beard somewhat resembles a squirrel's tail, the name 
squirrettaii has been given to wild barley. Wild barley 
is a pest because it giows rapidly and kills off other 
plants. Also, the seeds of wild barley cling to the wool 
of sheep and irritate their hides. When animals eat the 
leaves and flowers of the plant, the leaves and flowers 
sometimes stick in their throats and cause them to 
choke. A fungus that grows on wild barley produces the 
poisonous drug ergot (see Ergot). 

Scientific Classification. Wild barley belongs to the 
grass family, Grtwnmae, It is classified as genus Hordeum, 
species H. jubatum. Fr.\nk thone 

WILD BOAR. See Boar, Wild. 

WILD CANARY. See Goldfinch. 

WILD CARROT, or Queen Anne's Lace, is a carrot 
that grows wild. The cultivated carrot that people eat 
has a European and -Asiatic origin. In North .America, 
many carrot plants grow wild as common weeds. The 
name Queen Anne's lace was given the plants because 
of their lacy clusters of small white or yellowish flowers 
that grow in umbrellalike clusters. The wild carrot is 
either an annual or a biennial. It grows to 3 feet in 
height. Its thick yellow-orange roots resemble the do- 
mestic carrot, bin the roots of the wild carrot should not 
be eaten. 

Scientific Classification. Wild carrots belong to the 
parsley family, Cmbelltjerae. They are genus Daucus, 
species D. caro/a. theodor Just 

WILD CELERY. See Eelgrass. 

WILD FLOWER. See Flower (Wild Flowers). 



WILD FLOWER PRESERVATION SOCIETY OF AMER- 
ICA is an organization that attempts to save American 
wild flowers from destruction. Its many chapters 
throughout the country have headciuarters at the New 
York Botanical Gardens in The Bron.x, New York City. 

WILD GINGER. See Ginger. 

WILD MORNING-GLORY. See Bindweed. 

WILD PINK is a wild perennial herb of eastern North 
America. It has notched petals and small rose or white 
flowers about an inch wide. The plant grows as high 
as 9 inches. It blooms from April to June. The erect 
stem is tufted with sticky hairs. Wild pink is sometimes 
grown in gardens. It is easy to grow from seeds, divi- 
sions, or cuttings. 

Scientific Classification. Wild pink belongs to the pink 
family, Caryophyllaceae. It is classified as genus Silene, 
species .S', earoliniana. theudor jlst 

WILD RICE is an aquatic grass that grows from 4 to 8 
feet high. It is not related to rice (see Rice). Wild rice 
is not cultivated, but grows naturally in the shallow 
lakes of Minnesota, Wisconsin, and central Canada. 
The grain has large amounts of vitamin B. Indians 
harvested wild rice by bending the heads of the plant 
over the edge of a boat. They beat the grains loose with 
two slicks. 

Scientific Classification. Wild rice belongs to the grass 
family, Gramineae. It is classified as genus ^izania, species 
.^. aqualica. Richard a. Havens 

WILD ROSE. See Eglantine; Flower (color picture, 
Flowers of Roadside, Field, and Prairie); Rose. 

WILD WEST. .See Western Frontier Life. 

WILD WEST SHOW. See Buffalo Bill. 

WILDCAT is a name generally given to small, wild 
members of the cat family. The true wildcat lives in 
Europe. It is an extremely vicious animal, larger and 
stronger than the domestic cat. It has yellowish fur and 
black streaks around the body, legs, and tail. 

In North America, several species of lyn.x are called 
wildcats. The lynxes have longer bodies, longer legs, 
and shorter tails than domesticated cats. They prowl at 
night. Their ears have tufts of fur on them and their 
coats vary in color and thickness. The northern species 

Ttie Wild Carrot is well known to wild-flower lovers as Queen 
Anne's lace. Flower clusters are brilliant and showy. 

J. Hiirnce McFarland 




252 



of hnx has a long, clear-gray coat. The southwestern 
species, often called a bobcat, has short, \'ello\vish-bro\vn 
fur, covered with dark spots and other markings. 

.■^mong the many tropical species of wildcats, the 
most interesting is the Egyptian cat. It is believed to be 
one of the ancestors of the house cat. This ."Xfrican cat 
was tamed by Eg\'ptians and ultimately brought to 
Europe. Unlike other wildcats, the Eg\'ptian cat has a 
long slender tail. Yellowish, faintly striped fur covers 
its bod\'. People sometimes call it the gloved cat, because 
its black feet look like gloves. 

Scientific Classification. Wildcats belong to the family 
Ffttdae. The European species is classified as genus 
Fells, species F. catiis. Bobcats are genus Lynx, species 
L, rujus. Harold E. Anthony 

See also Bobcat; C.\t (The Cat in Histoiy); Lynx; 
Serval. 

WILDCAT BANK was the name for unstable banking 
institutions which issued paper money called wildcat 
currency. They operated under state charters, par- 
ticularly in the South, during the early and middle 
1800's. They became especially numerous and irre- 
sponsible after President Andrew Jackson's successful 
struggle against the Second Bank of the United States. 

The Bank of the United States used its influence to 
restrain state banks from issuing more paper money, or 
wildcat currency, than their assets would justify. When 
Jackson succeeded in withdrawing government de- 
posits from the Bank of the United States, his vic- 
toiy so crippled the Bank that it could no longer restrain 
the state banks. Many banks, especially in the South 
and West, then issued imreasonably large amo.unts of 
paper money, and lent it freely on the flimsiest security. 

As a result, this caused a money inflation, followed 
by a period of \vild speculation in Western land. The 
situation finally alarmed Jackson, who then issued his 
famous "Specie Circular," ordering government agents 
to accept nothing but gold and silver in payment for 
public lands. In consequence, many of the wildcat 
banks were unable to meet the demands made on them 
and failed abaiptly. These bank failures contributed to 
the serious financial panic in 1837. John d. Hicks 

.See also Jackson, Andrew (The Money Surplus). 

WILDE, OSCAR (1854-1900), was an Irish dramatist, 
poet, and wit. It is difficult to determine how much of 
his fame is based on his writings and how much is based 
on the startling and unconventional manner of his life 
and the brilliance of his conversation. Wherever Wilde 
appeared, he ^vas expected to say witty things. 

He is famous as an author 
of plays and fairy tales. 
The Happy Prince and Other 
Tales (1891) is a volume of 
fairy stories. He wrote the 
comedy play. The Impor- 
tance of Being Earnest ( 1 895), 
and an ingenious novel. 
The Picture of Dorian Gray 
(1891). 

Wilde was born in Dub- 
lin. His father was a success- 
ful Dublin surgeon, and his 
mother a devotee of poetiy 
and sparkling conversation. 
Wilde studied little at 



Oscar Wilde 




WILDER, LAURA INGALLS 

Trinity College, Dublin, and at Oxford University. 
But he possessed an amazing memory and imaginative 
genius, and he won scholastic honors. He tried in 0.\- 
ford, and later in London, to convert Victorians to a 
love of beauty for its own sake. Because he and others 
wore flamboyant clothing and did other things con- 
sidered eccentric, he was caricatured in Punch, the 
humor magazine, and in Gilbert and Sullivan's light 
opera. Patience. 

Needing money, Wilde went on a lecture tour in the 
United States in 1882. People treated him as a person 
of great interest and he was quoted in the newspapers. 
He did not, however, \vear a sunflower or a lily, as he 
was accused of doing. He was a serious person, but 
people overlooked his profound thought because they 
wanted only entertainment. Today the serious merits 
of his books are appreciated. 

In 1895 Wilde was sentenced to prison for immorality. 
After his release, he went to live in France under the 
name of Sebastian Mclmoth. He lived chiefly in Paris, 
where he died in poverty and disrepute. Walter Wright 

See also English Literature (Poets and Essayists). 

WILDEBEEST. See Gnu. 

WILDER, LAURA INGALLS (1867-1957), was an 
American author of pioneer stories for children. She 
began writing a series of eight books at the age of 65. 
All but one are based on her own childhood in the 
pioneer West. These stories for children, known as the 
"Little House" books, draw an authentic historical pic- 
ture of prairie and woods. They show the importance 
of a closely knit family life, and are filled with humor 
and tenderness. 

Mrs. Wilder w'as born in Pepin, Wis. She lived a 
rugged pioneer life with her famil)' as they moved from 
place to place in the Dakota and Minnesota territories, 
and later in the Indian Territory. .She lived in De Smet, 
S. Dak., and later near Mansfield, Mo. She married 
Almanzo \Vilder, who came from an old established 
family in northern New York state. Farmer Boy (1933) 
is the story of his childhood. These Happy Golden Tears 
( 1 943) unites the two families with the marriage of 
Laura and Almanzo. 

Her other books include Little House in the Big ]Voods 
(1932), Little House on the Prairie (1935), On the Banks of 
Plum Creek (1937), By the Shores of Silver Lake (1939), 
The Long Winter (1940), and Little Town on the Prairie 
(1941). The series represents a colorful literay saga of 
tlie spirit of American life 
on the frontier. 

The Laura Inealls Wilder '•'""■» '"B""' *"«'«'• 

^ ILijptr &amp; Bros. 

Award was established in 
1 954 by the Children's Li- 
brary Association. Laura 
Ingalls Wilder herself re- 
ceived the first award for 
her lasting contribution to 
children's literature. The 
award is given every five Wl^ . - J^ 

years to an author or artist 
whose work in the field of 
children's books and litera- 
ture is outstanding for sev- 
eral years, george e. butler 




253 




Thornton Wilder 



WILDER, THORNTON NIVEN 

WILDER, THORNTON NIVEN (1897- ), is an 
American writer. He won Pulitzer prizes in 1928 for 
his novel The Bridge of San Luis Rey (1927). in 1938 for 
his play Our Town (1938), and in 1943 for his play 
The Skin of Our Teeth (1942). Wilder developed many 
new writing techniques. The Bridge of San Luis Rey 
has an original plot in which the characters are 
brought together in a common catastrophe by mere 
chance. Our Town is a play with no scenery or settings. 
In The Skin of Our Teeth, the actors step out of their 
parts to comment upon the 
dramatic action. This was 
an experiment in the tise of 
time in an unconventional 
fashion. 

VVilder's other writings 

include the novels. The 

1 1 'oman of Andros ( 1 930) and 

Heaven's My Destination 

(1935); and the plays. The 

Trumpet Shall Sound {\9'26) 

and The Merchant of Yon- 

kers (1939). He rewrote the 

latter as The Matchmaker 

and won success with it at 

the Edinburgh Festival of 

1954. He began a proposed series of 14 one-act plays on 

the ages of man and the seven deadly sins in 1962 with 

three plays under the title. Plays for Bleecker Street. 

Wilder was born on April 17, 1897, in Madison, Wis. 

He spent his childhood in China, and studied at Oberlin 

College and Yale University. George Freedley 

WILDERNESS, BATTLE OF THE. See Civil War ("If 

It Takes All Summer")- 

WILDERNESS ROAD was an important pioneer road. 
In March, 1 775, 30 axmen led by Daniel Boone began 
to cut a trail. Their route began at the Block House 
in Virginia, passed through the Powell River Valley, 
crossed the Cumberland Mountains through Cumber- 
land Gap, and ended in central Kentucky. Boone and 
his followers built a settlement called Boonesborough at 
the trail's end near present-day Lexington. Another 
branch of the Wilderness Road led to Harrodsburg. 
The Wilderness Road was the only usable route 
through the mountains to the rich lands of Kentucky. 
It was a rocky, mountainous trail menaced by un- 
friendly Indians. By 1800, about 200,000 settlers had 
traveled the Wilderness Road. w. Turrentine j.^ckson 
See also Trails of Early Days (map). 
WILDLIFE CONSERVATION. Animal life has suffered 
as man has made progress. The clearing of forests, the 
draining of swamps, the damming of rivers, and other 
steps taken for the development of agriculture, mining, 
and industry have been of great benefit to civilization 
when these activities were wisely planned. But one of 
the bad results has been the disappearance of much wild 
animal life because of the destruction of natural homes. 
The plump passenger pigeons that used to be abundant 
in the eastern and midwestern United States can no 
longer be seen anywhere, for the species is extinct. Only 
a few herds of buffalo remain. They are protected in 
national preserves and on private ranches. Today, most 
nations protect wildlife by laws that seek to preserve all 



of the useful species of land animal, bird, or fish. 
Wildlife Conservation in the United States. A few 

people raised their voices in protest against the reckless 
destruction of America's animal life in the middle 
1800's. But only a few practical steps were taken during 
the following 50 years. California passed the first law 
for the creation of wildlife refuges in 1870. The Lake 
Merritt wild-fowl sanctuar)-, now in the city of Oak- 
land, was established under this law. But no other state 
followed until 1903, when Indiana established its first 
wildlife refuge. The national park program was an early 
aid to the saving of wildlife. Yellowstone Park was 
created by an Act of Congress in 1872. In 1894, it be- 
came illegal to kill wildlife within the park. In 1903, 
President Theodore Roosevelt established the first fed- 
eral wildlife refuge at Pelican Island, Florida. 

Between 1913 and 1925, wildlife refuges were estab- 
lished in 24 states. Some refuges selected in the early 
experimental years were later abandoned. But the idea 
of refuges became firmly established as a part of the 
American system of wildlife management. The first 
federal refuge especially for big-game animals was the 
national bison range, established on the Flathead Indian 
Reservation in Montana in 1909. In the same year, the 
Olympic National Monument was set aside for the pro- 
tection of the Roosevelt elk. In 1938, diis reservation 
became Olympic National Park. 

The Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 provided for 
the protection of birds migrating between the United 
States and Canada. The act also stimulated the estab- 
lishment of bird refuges in both countries. Three bills 
passed by Congress in 1924, 1928, and 1929 established 
bird refuges on the upper Mississippi, at the mouth of 
the Bear River in Utah, and at Cedar Keys, Florida. 
See Bird (How We Protect Birds). 

The wildlife conservation program made great strides 
during the administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt. 
The establishment of the Civilian Conservation Corps 
in 1933 brought needed labor to many of the federal 
and state wildlife refuges. The Works Progress Admin- 
istration helped to create better federal refuges. The 
United States Fish and Wildlife Service was established 
as a part of the Department of the Interior in 1940. It 
took over the functions formerly vested in the United 
States Bureau of Fisheries and the United States Bureau 
of Biological Survey. While not directly aimed at wild- 
life conservation, broad water-power and reforestation 
programs like the Tennessee Valley Authority created 
improved conditions for all wildlife. 

Federal and state wildlife conservation efforts have 
been aided by such organizations as the National Audu- 
bon Society, the American Ornithologists' Union, the 
Isaac Walton League, the Boone and Crockett Club, 
the National Wildlife Federation, and the Wildlife 
Management Institute. 

Types of Refuges. The Fish and Wildlife Service has 
classified wildlife refuges into four types: (1) special- 
purpose, (2) big-game, (3) migratory waterfowl, and 
(4) general wildlife refuges. 

Special-Purpose refuges protect single colonies or groups 
of colonies of birds or mammals. Pelican Island, the 
first federal refuge, is a good example of this type. Spe- 
cial refuges protect such birds as herons, ibis, gulls, 
terns, skimmers, auklets, murrelets, puffins, pelicans, 
fulmars, petrels, and cormorants. 



254 



Big-Game refuges and game ranges provide forage and 
water for herds of big-game animals. Federal refuges 
now provide for one or more nucleus herds of bison, 
white-tailed and mule deer, elk, black-tailed deer, an- 
telope, and mountain sheep. Animals not yet provided 
for in the continental United States are the grizzly bear, 
moose, mountain goat, and caribou. 

Migratory Waterfowl refuges are combined land and 
water areas set aside to meet the needs of waterfowl. 
Waterfowl refuges fall into three natural classes: 
(1) breeding areas; (2) resting and feeding areas; and 
(3) wintering grounds. 

General Wildlife refuges are made by closing an area 
to hunting and furnisliing enough patrols to back up 
the warning signs. There are few federal general wildlife 
refuges. Those on the Aleutian Islands and in the Ken- 
tucky Woodlands National Wildlife Refuge are among 
the most important. General wildlife refuges are numer- 
ous in state conservation systems, and are often main- 
tained by individuals. Theodore H. Eaton, Jr. 

See also Audubon Society, National; Conserva- 
tion (Wildlife Conservation); Game (hunting). 

WILEY, HARVEY WASHINGTON (1844-1930), an 
American chemist, campaigned against dishonest prac- 
tices in food packaging. As chief chemist for the United 
States Department of Agriculture, he fought for the 
enactment of a pure food and dmgs act. In 1906 Con- 
gress passed Wiley's bill, the first of a series of such laws. 
Wiley was born in Kent, Jefferson County, Indiana. 
He became a professor of chemistry at Purdue Univer- 
sity after graduating from Hanover College and the 
Medical College of Indiana. Herbert s. rhinesmith 

See also Pure Food and Drug Laws. 

WILEY COLLEGE is a coeducational school at Mar- 
shall, Tex. It is controlled by the Methodist Church. 
Wiley College offers courses in education, arts and 
sciences, commerce, music, and home economics. The 
college was founded in 1873. For enrollment, see Uni- 

VERSlTtES AND COLLEGES (table). 

WILFRID, THOMAS (1889- ), developed and 
demonstrated the clavilux (color organ). As a student, 
he tried to establish a relationship between the light 
spectrum and the chromatic scale, but failed. He next 
sought a correspondence between the elements of paint- 
ing — form, color, and motion — and those of music — 
melody, harmony, and rhythm — in their emotional 
effects on an audience. In 1919, he demonstrated the 
clavilu.x (see Cla\tlux). He later performed his own 
compositions on this instrument. Wilfrid was born in 

Nastved, Denmark. Richard D. Humphrey 

WILHELM, I'lL helm, in English, William, was the 
name of two German emperors. 

Wilhelm I (1797-1888) became king of Prussia and 
the first emperor of modern Germany. During the revo- 
lution of 1848, Wilhelm became unpopular because he 
opposed constitutional reform. He was forced to leave 
the country, but he soon came back and put down an 
uprising in Baden. 

In 1858, Wilhelm became regent for his brother, Fred- 
erick William IV, who was suffering from mental dis- 
orders. He was proclaimed king of Prussia and given the 
title Wilhelm I in 1861. He supported the policies of 
his prime minister. Otto von Bismarck, who brought 
about tfiree wars in the process of unifying Germany 
(see Bismarck). During the Franco-Prussian War in 



WILHELM 

1871, Wilhelm became Kaiser (emperor) of a united 
Germany (see Franco-Prussian War; Germany [The 
Unification of Germany]). 

Wilhelm was born in Berlin, the second son of Fred- 
erick W'illiam III, king of Prussia. He was trained as a 
soldier from his early x'outh. and he fought in the war 
of 1814 and 1815 against Napoleon I. See also Prussia 
(picture). 




Wilhelm I 



Wilhelm II 



Wilhelm II (1859-1941) was the last emperor of Ger- 
many. The HohenzoUern dynasty, which had ruled 
Prussia since 1701, ended with him (see Hohenzol- 
lern). Wilhelm was the Kaiser of World War I. Al- 
though he received blame for the war, historians now 
believe that Russia and Austria were equally guilty in 
bringing on the conflict. 

Wilhelm, the grandson of Wilhelm I, was born in 
Berlin. He was the oldest son of Emperor Frederick III 
and Princess Victoria, daughter of Queen Victoria of 
England. George V of England and Nicholas II of 
Russia, who fought against him during World War I, 
were his cousins. His education emphasized military 
training, and made him friendly to the aristocratic 
military class. Wilhelm had a paralyzed left arm. He 
hid this weakness and ruled as the most powerful figure 
in Germany. 

Wilhelm came to the throne in 1888 after the 100-day 
reign of his father (see Frederick [III] of Prussia). 
Bismarck was still chancellor and prime minister, but 
Wilhelm dismissed him in 1890. Under Wilhelm's reign, 
Gemiany became prosperous. He encouraged manu- 
facturing, trade, and commerce. He gained colonies in 
Africa and in the Pacific Ocean, and he built up the 
army and the navy until they were among the greatest 
in the world. His program of colonial, naval, and foreign 
trade expansion brought Germany into conflict with 
Great Britain. 

In 1890, Wilhelm broke the old Pmssian alliance 
with Russia. This diplomatic blunder forced Germany 
in 1914 to fight a two-front war and led that nation to 
ultimate defeat (see Germany' [The United Empire; 
Germany in World War I]). Early in November, 1918, 
several revolts broke out and the German Navy muti- 
nied. On November 7, the prime minister demanded 
that Wilhelm give up his throne. W'ilhelm abdicated 
two days later. He fled to The Netherlands, which was 
neutral. For more than 20 years he lived in comfortable 

exile at Doom. Gabriel a. Almond 



255 




Netherlands lnfnrmati..n Sir 

Queen Wilhelmina 



WILHELMINA 

WILHELMINA, wil lid ME nuh (1880-1962), became 

queen ol The Netherlands in 1890 when her father, 

William III, died. Her mother. Queen Emma, ruled as 

regent until 1898. In 1901 \Vilhelmina married Henry, 

Duke of Mecklcnburg- 

Schwerin. 

When the Germans in- 
vaded The Netherlands in 
1940, they tried to capture 
Wilhelmina. But she es- 
caped to Londonand direct- 
ed The Netherlands forces 
against both Germany and 
Japan. After the war, her 
people joyfully welcomed 
Iter home. She celebrated 
her Golden Jubilee in Au- 
gust, 1 948, and then gave up 
her throne to her daughter, 
Juliana (see Juli.\n.^). She 
became the Princess of The Netherlands. She was born 
at The Hague, The Netherlands. Jane k. miller 

WILKES, CHARLES (1798-1877), was an American 
rear admiral in the Civil War. He won fame for his ex- 
plorations in the Antarctic, and for seizing the Confed- 
erate envo&gt;s, James Mason and John Slidell. His re- 
moval of the envoys from the British mail packet Trent 
near Cuba in November, 1861, caused the "Trent 
Affair." It threatened to involve the United States in 
war with England (see Trent Affair). 

Wilkes was born on April 3, 1 798, in New York City. 
In 1838, he commanded an expedidon in the Pacific 
Ocean. He sighted land on Jan. 30, 1840, and called it 
the Antanlu Continent. Wilkes was the first per.son to rec- 
ognize Antarctica as a separate continent and not just a 
field of ice. The land he sighted was named Wilkes 

Land 72 years later. Richard S. West, Jr. 

WILKES-BARRE, WILKS bar uli, Pa. (pop. 63,551; 
alt. 640 ft.), is a railroad, manufacturing, and trading 
center in the rich hard-coal district of northeastern 
Pennsylvania. It lies in the Wyoming Valley on the east 
bank of the Susquehanna River, about 100 miles north- 
west of Philadelphia (see Pennsylvania [political map]). 

Wilkes-Barre products include pencils and rubber 
products, shoes and apparel, wire rope and assemblies, 
tobacco, electronic equipment, aircraft and missile 
parts, beer, toys, boilers, lace, and gas generators. 

Colonists from Connecticut made the first setdement 
on the site of Wilkes-Ba'rre in 1 769. The settlement was 
twice destroyed by file. Wilkes-Barre became a city in 
1871. It has a mayor-council government, s. K. Stevens 

WILKES COLLEGE. See Universities and Colleges 
(table). 

WILKINS, SIR HUBERT (1888-1958), was an Austra- 
lian explorer and aviator. He became famous for his 
air explorations in the Arctic and Antarctic. 

Wilkins navigated a pioneering airplane Hight from 
Great Britain to Australia in 1919. He went on two 
British Antarctic expeditions in 1920 and 1921, and led 
an expedition for the British Museum from 1923 to 
1925. After two unsuccessful attempts, he and Carl Ben 
Eielson flew an airplane across the Arctic Ocean in 
1928. They flew from Point Barrow, Alaska, to Spits- 

256 




I'-S. Army 

Sir Hubert Wilkins 



bergen (now Svalbard), a 
distance of 2,200 miles. 
King George V knighted 
him for this achievement in 
1928. 

Later that year, Wilkins 
led an expedition that sur- 
veyed Antarctic Peninsula 
by air. In 1931 he tried to 
reach the North Pole by 
submarine. He managed 
Lincoln Ellsworth'sAntarc- 
lic expeditions from 1933 
to 1939. He served in the 
L'.S. deparmients of War 
and Defense after 1942. 

Wilkins was born in Mount Bryan East in the state of 
South Australia, Australia. His full name was George 
Hubert Wilkins. John e. Caswell 

WILKINS, MARY ELEANOR. See Freeman, Mary 
Eleanor Wilkins. 

WILKINS, MAURICE HUGH FREDERICK (1916- ), 
is a British biophysicist. He shared the 1962 Nobel prize 
in physiology and medicine with biologists James D. 
Watson of the United States and Francis H. C. Crick of 
Great Britain. Wilkins performed X-ray studies on de- 
oxyribonucleic acid (DNA), the substance that transmits 
genetic inforination from one generation to the ne.xt. 
This work led Watson and Crick to create a model of 
the molecular sUucture of DNA. 

Wilkins worked on the World War II Manhattan 
Project that developed the atomic bomb. He turned to 
biophysics research after the war. Working at King's 
College in London, he became an authority on the 
structure of nucleic acids. Wilkins was born in Ponga- 
roa. New Zealand. irwin h. herskowitz 

See also Nucleic Acid. 

WILKINS, ROY (1901- ), is a noted American 
Negro leader. He became executive secretary of the 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People (NAACP) in 1955, and helped direct the fight 
for equal rights and opportunities for Negroes. In 1964, 
he won the Spingarn medal for his work in promoting 
civil rights. 

Wilkins was born in St. Louis, Mo., the grandson of 
a slave. He was graduated from the University of Min- 
nesota. Wilkins worked for a Negro newspaper, the Kan- 
sas City Call, before he joined the NAACP. He edited 
the NAACP magazine The Crisis from 1934 to 1949. 

WILKINSON, JAMES. See Frankfort. 

WILL, in law, is a document that disposes of a per- 
son's property and becomes effective after his death. 
The person who makes the will is called the testator, if a 
man, and the testatrix, if a woman. The persons named 
in the will to whom the testator's property is to be 
distributed are usually called the distributees. Personal 
property left by will is called a bequest, or a legacy. Real 
estate that is left is called a devise. 

It is important to have a will prepared by a lawyer in 
order to be sure that it effectively disposes of property 
and that it may not be successfully contested by persons 
who disagree with its terms. If the testator owns more 
than a certain amount of property when he dies, the 
government of the state where he lives and the United 
States government \\ ill collect an estate tax. Unless die 



will has been carefully drawn by a law\'er, this estate 
tax may be unnecessarily large and the distributees may 
not receive as much as the testator had intended them 
to receive. 

Administration. A testator may dispose of his prop- 
erty in any way he chooses, so long as the disposal is not 
contrary to law. The will usually names some person as 
an executor. The executor has the duty of seeing that the 
wishes of the testator are carried out. If no executor has 
been named, the court which has jurisdiction over 
estates may appoint an administrator, whose duties are 
the same as those of an executor. The general rule is 
that every executor, even a close relative, must give a 
surety, or bond for the faithful performance of his duties. 
II he does not faithfully carry out the provisions of the 
will, he forfeits the bond he has put up as evidence of 
his honesty. Usually, the giving of a bond may be 
waived if the will so provides. 

Estate Plan. It is desirable that persons who own con- 
siderable propert)' have an estate plan in which the will 
is only a part. An estate plan is prepared by a specially 
skilled lawyer, often after consultation with the testa- 
tor's family, his insurance agent, his accountant, and 
his business associates. Its purpose is to make the pro- 
visions of the will consistent with the testator's insurance 
jjolicies, the circumstances of his business, the wills of 
other members of his family, and the state and federal 
tax laws. A properh- dra\vn estate plan may save many 
thousands of dollars that othenvise would have to be 
paid in estate taxes. 

Codicil is an addition made after the will has been 
prepared. It changes or modifies the will in some way. 
A will may be altered or destroyed by the testator at any 
time. Such alteration will be legal provided that the 
testator is of sound mind and that proof is available to 
show that the alteration was not caused by undue in- 
fluence from parties interested in the change. In addi- 
tion, the codicil must be made according to the 
formalities required by state law just as the will must be. 
If the will must be witnessed by two persons, or by 
three persons, then the codicil must be witnessed by the 
same number. 

State Laws. The formalities rcciuired by state law 
ditter widely. Each state of the United States and each 
province of Canada has laws governing wills. Some 
laws require that a will be witnessed. Others do not. 
The number of witnesses required may vary. Some 
states say that persons in a confidential or close blood 
relationship with the testator are not competent as 
witnesses. Others say they may be witnesses, but may 
not receive any benefit from the will if the\" do serve 
as witnesses. 

A number of states accept the so-called holographic 
will, or one prepared in the testator's own handwriting 
and unwitnessed. But such a will, invalid in many 
states, often leads to litigation even in states where it 
may be valid. Many states allow persons, under certain 
circumstances, to make a nuncupative, or oral, will. But 
these circumstances may vary. A person may die intes- 
tate, or without a valid will. His property descends 
according to state law. This distribution may be con- 
trary to his intention. A person should have his will 
prepared by a lawyer to insure that it is valid and re- 
flects his intention. Wjlliam Tucker dean 

See also Codicil; Ex£CUTOr; Legacy'; Probate. 



WILL-O'-THE-WISP 

WILL, in psychology, is the name given to a person's 
ability to act purposefully. When you turn on the light 
to see what is in a rooin, you tnay be said to have ivilted 
the action. This type of act is called voluntary. On the 
other hand, when you blink your eyes spontaneously 
at a sudden flash of light, this action is not willed, and 
is called involuntary. 

Psychologists often think of the will as a special ca- 
pacity by which the individual translates his desires and 
ideas into action. Thus, if you desire to improve your 
grades in school, your will can keep you at your books 
even though you might be tempted to go swimming. 

Many present-day psychologists prefer to use the term 
wilt, not to refer to a capacity of the mind, but as a name 
for several factors within a person. These are the factors 
which go into the process of making a decision. Proin- 
inent among these factors are our habits, interests, and 
desires. We often find a conflict within ourselves be- 
cause we want a variety of things. For example, we 
would like to have good grades as well as a swim. We 
are loyal to a variety of ideals — to personal integrity as 
well as to friendship. Wc may be undecided and feel 
frustrated by our various needs. The need we feel to 
make up our minds often comes out of such indecision. 
The achievements of many of the greatest men in his- 
tory started as their reaction to a deep feeling of frus- 
tration. 

There need not be a clash, however, between the two 
views of the will, because they bring out different as- 
pects. Taken as a distinct power of man, the will signi- 
fies our basic and enduring tendency to obtain what 
perfects and satisfies our whole nature. But the will does 
not act in isolation. It works in and through our particu- 
lar habits, interests, and attitudes. They enable the will 
to follow an intelligent and efi'ective plan. And, in 
turn, our inclinations and interests have to be brought 
to some decision and integrated with our basic needs 
and desires. This is done through the will's acts of 
choice. Suppose you wish to change one of your atti- 
tudes, such as that of envying certain persons. This 
change of attitude must occur through effort to allow 
other attitudes toward these persons to dominate your 
feelings. 

We might say that a person is what he strives for. 
He can often be tmderstood best through his \\ ishes and 
his ambitions. His will power expresses his deteiTnina- 
tion to achieve a certain goal. A person's will power 
can often make the diflerence between success and 
failure. hadley Cantril 

See also Free Will. 

WILL-O'-THE-WISP is a strange light that sometimes 
hovers over marsh)- places. It resembles a pale flame. 
People once believed it was usually seen in churchyards 
at night. But there has always been some doubt of its 
existence. Many scientists have investigated the will-o'- 
the-wisp, but their findings have not been definite. 
Those who believe the light exists say it results from 
spontaneous combustion of gases. Will-o'-the-wisp is 
sometimes caWed spunkie, jack-o'-lantern, and ignis faluus. 
The term ignis fatuus comes from the Latin, and means 
foolish/ire. This "fire" was once thought to trap persons 
who attempted to follow it in marshes, ralfh c. qwens 

See also Jack-o'-Lantern. 



237 



WILLAMETTE RIVER 

WILLAMETTE RIVER, wih LAM et, rises in the Cas- 
cade and Coast mountains of west-central Oregon. It 
flows northward for about 190 miles through a valley 
about 30 miles wide, and empties into the Columbia 
River. For location, see Oregon (color map). The 
Willamette Valley is the richest farming area in Oregon. 
Ocean-going ships can sail up the river for 12 miles to 
Portland, which is the largest city in Oregon. A canal 
around Willamette Falls allows small ships and boats 
to go up the river to Eugene, a city 125 miles from 

Portland. Richard M. Highsmitii, Jr. 

WILLAMETTE UNIVERSITY. See UNivERSiTiES and 
Colleges (tabic). 

WILLARD, ARCHIBALD M. See Spirit of '76. 
WILLARD, EMMA HART (1 787-1870). became known 
as the first American woman publicly to support higher 
education for women. Her efforts advanced that move- 
ment in the United States. She also wrote a volume of 
poems which included 
"Rocked in the Cradle of 
the Deep" (1830). 

Mrs. Willard was born 
in Berlin, Conn., and start- 
ed teaching school there at 
the age of 16. In 1809 she 
married John Willard, 
who helped her establish a 
girls' boarding school at 
Nliddlebury, Vt. Later, she 
founded a girls' seminary 
at Watertown, N.Y. It was 
later moved to Troy, N.Y., 
where it became famous as 
the Emma Willard School. 
She strongly supported the establishment of public 
schools, and educated hundreds of teachers in her 

schools for girls. Claude A. Egcertsen 

WILLARD, FRANCES ELIZABETH CAROLINE (1839- 
1898), was an American educator and social reformer. 
She organized the temperance movement on the plan 
by which it attained national prohibition (see Prohibi- 
tion; Temperance). She served as president of the 
Woman's Christian Temperance Union (W.C.T.U.) 
from 1879 until her death, and made the W.C.T.U. a 
national organization (see Wom.\n's Christian Tem- 
perance Union). In 1883, Miss Willard founded a 
world temperance union. She was also a strong advocate 
of woman suffrage. 

Miss Willard was born 
on Sept. 28, 1839, at 
Churchville, N.Y. She 
served as president of the 
Evanston (111.) College for 
Ladies. When it merged 
with Northwestern Univer- 
sity, she became the dean 
of the Woman's College. 

A statue of Frances Wil- 
lard represents the state 
of Illinois in Statuary 
Hall in the United States 
Capitol in Washington, 

D.C. Louis Filler 




Wayne Davis 

Emma Willard 



Frances E. Willard 



Brown Bros. 




WILLEMITE. See Zinc. 

WILLEMSTAD, I7Z. urn slahi (pop. 43,500; met. area 
94,U(JU; alt. 65 ft.), capital of the Netheriands Antil- 
les, lies on the southwest coast of Curagao Island (see 
Venezuela [color map]). It has one of the finest 
harbors in the West Indies. A free port, it is a ware- 
housing and shopping center for the southeastern Carib- 
bean. See also Netherlands Antilles (pictures). 

WILLET is a large shore bird of North and South Amer- 
ica, related to sandpipers and snipes. The willet is often 
called the duck snipe, and has 10 or more other common 
names. The eastern ivillet breeds along the Atlantic 
C^oast between Virginia and the Bahama Islands, and 
migrates in winter as far south as Peru. It is rarely 
seen in Europe. The western willet ranges from Manitoba 
to Texas, and migrates south to the area around the 
Caribbean Sea in winter. 

The willet measures about 16 inches long, and ap- 
pears gray or white-colored below, and dark gray above. 
Its extended wings display striking black and white 
markings. Its long bill is straight and slender. The bird 
nests in a clump of weeds or grass in marshes close to the 
shore. The female lays four greenish-white or brownish- 
olive eggs that are speckled brown and purple. 

Scientific Classification. The eastern willet belongs to 
the family Scolopacidae. It is genus Catoplrophorus, species 
C semipalmatus, subspecies semipalmatus. The western 
willet is (-'. semipalmatus inornatus. Herbert friedmann 

WILLIAM was the name of four kings of England. 

William I, the Conqueror (1027-1087), was the first 
Norman king of England. He was born at Falaise, 
France. He was the son of Robert I, Duke of Nor- 
mandy, and inherited Normandy at the age of eight. 
During his )'outh, there were many disorders. At the age 
of 20, he put down a great rebellion at the battle of 
Val-es-dunes, which he won with the aid of his lord, 
King Henry of France. From that time on, William 
ruled Normandy with an iron hand. 

In 1051, William visited England. King Edward the 
Confessor granted him the succession to the English 
throne as his nearest adult heir. In 1064, Harold, Ed- 
ward's brother-in-law, was shipwrecked on the Norman 
coast and taken prisoner. He promised to support Wil- 
liam's claim to the throne in return for his freedom. But 
when Edward died in 1066, Harold obtained the suc- 
cession on the basis of a deathbed grant by Edward and 
election by the nobles and prelates of England (see 
Harold [II] of England). 

William immediately invaded England. His expedi- 
tion had the pope's blessings, because William was 
expected to depose the Anglo-Saxon archbishop of 
Canterbury and introduce ecclesiastical reforms. Before 
William could sail, the king of Norway invaded north- 
ern England. King Harold hurried north and defeated 
the Norwegian invaders at Stamford Bridge. William 
landed before Harold could return to defend the coast. 
The Normans destroyed the Anglo-Saxon army and 
killed Harold at the BatUe of Hastings (see Hastings, 
Battle of; Norman Conqltest). 

On Christmas Day, 1066, William was crowned king. 
William then suppressed local rebellions. He took lands 
from those who resisted him, and gave them to his fol- 
lowers to hold in reau'n for their military service to him. 
To emphasize the legitimacy of his crown, William con- 
finned the laws of Edward the Confessor and retained 



258 



all the powers of the Anglo-Saxon monarchy. He levied 
Danegeld, the only national tax on landed property in 
all of Europe at that time. At Salisbury in 1086, he 
made all the landholders, even the vassals of his barons, 
swear allegiance directly to him as king. 

\\'illiam was devout, firm in purpose, and unchang- 
ing in gaining liis ends. His greatest monument is Domes- 
day Book, an exhaustive survey of the land, the principal 
landholders, die farm population, and the material and 
financial resources of his realm (see Domesd.^y Book). 

See also Fl.-\g (color picture, Historical Flags of die 
World [Early English Flags]). 

William ij (1057?-1 100), son of William I, became 
king in 1 087. He was called Rufus, meaning red, because 
of his itiddy complexion. Lustful for power and coni- 
pleteh' illiterate, he mled with violence radier than 
strength. The clergy denounced his bnitality and his in- 
fringements on church rights. 

In 1088, several powerful Xornian barons revolted 
against William. He put down the revolt and strength- 
ened his position. Later, he gained control of Nor- 
mandy by financing the crusading ventures of his 
brother Robert, Duke of Normand)-. He also invaded 
Scotland and brought it under his control in 1097. 

William's reign was marked by a bitter quarrel \vith 
the Roman Catholic Church. William kept the see of 
Canterbury vacant after the archbisliop died in 1089, 
in order to collect its revenues for himself. When he fell 
seriously ill in 1093, he welcomed the election of Anselm 
as archbishop to atone for his sins. But when he re- 
covered his health, he forced .Anselm into exile. An 
arrow shot by a fellow hunter killed William while he 
was hiniting. The clergy refused to give him a church 
ftuieral. Robert S. Ho-^-t 

William III (1650-1702), known as Willi.\m of 
Or.wge. was king of England, Scotland, and Ireland. 
He was born in The Hague, the son of the Prince of 
Orange and Mar)", the daughter of Charles I of Eng- 
land. He gained fame by his opposition to King Louis 
XI\' of France. 

When Louis invaded The Netherlands in 1672, the 
Dutch chose William as their leader. William was de- 
feated time and again, but continued to fight. Once he 



William the Conqueror Lands on the English Coast. 




WILLIAM I 

was forced to open the dikes and flood the land. This 
stopped the French for a while, and William had time 
to build up an alliance against them. In 1677, he mar- 
ried his cousin Mary. Her father, James, Duke of '^'ork, 
later became James II of England. 

William hoped to gain England's support. He be- 
came friendly with those opposed to King James II, 
who was a Roman Catholic. When James' son was bap- 
tized a Catholic, the Protestants turned to William and 
Mary-. Both were related to the royal family, and both 
were Protestant. The leaders of the political parties in- 
vited them to rule England, .'\lthough they were to rule 
jointly. \Villiam insisted on making the decisions. 

William landed in England with an army of 14,000 
men in 1688. No blood was shed in this ""Glorious Rev- 
olution." and James escaped to France. William and 
Mai-y became rulers of England in 1689, after they 
promised to obey the terms of the Declaration of Rights 
(later called the Bill of Rights). In 1690. William de- 
feated James and a French and Irish army at the BatUe 
of the Boyne, in Ireland. 
The Protestants of L'lsier, 
Ireland, backed William, 
and are still called Orange- 
men today. 

W'illiam \vas one of the 
ablest kings ofEngland. but 
he was not popular. The 
people did not understand 
his ways, and he did not un- 
derstand the English politi- 
cal system. He let Parlia- 
ment limit his power in 
order to gain its support 
against France. He proved 
to be a good soldier and a 
clever diplomat in the struggle with France over Louis 
XI\''s attempt to annex the Spanish Empire. He made 
alliances in 1701 with nearly all Europe against Louis, 
but he died before the War of the Spanish Succession 
began . 

.See also Bill of Rights (English Bill of Rights). 

William IV (1 765-1837) was the son of King George 
III and Charlotte of Mecklenbiug-Strelitz. He suc- 
ceeded his older brother George I\', and i-uled from 
1830 to his death. Three of England's greatest refoi-ms 
were passed during his reign. They were the Reform 
Bill of 1832, the abolition of slavery in England's 
colonies, and factoiy reform (see Gre.^t Britain [The 

Era of RefoiTn]). Willard M. Wallace 

WILLIAM, of Germany. See Wilhelm. 

WILLIAM I ( 1 772-1844) was the first king of the pres- 
cntda\' kingdom of The Netherlands. He was the son 
of William \ , Prince of Orange, the last Netherlands 
governor, or stadthouder, who lost his throne to the 
French in 1795. William I joined the Prussian Army 
against Napoleon I, and in 1806 lost the German duchy 
of Nassau. He regained Nassau in 1815, but then he 
traded it for the duchy of Luxembourg at the Congress 
of Vienna. 

The Congress made William king of the new state of 
The Netherlands, including Belgium and Luxembourg. 
In 1830. Belgium demanded its independence, which 




Brow 

William III 




Brown Bros. 



William I 



WILLIAM I, PRINCE OF ORANGE 

was recognized in 1839. Because of trouble within the 
country, Wilham gave up The Netherlands throne in 
1840, in favor of his son, William II. ]\~&lt;f. k. Miller 

WILLIAM I, PRINCE OF 
ORANGE (1533- 1584), was 
the father of the Dutch Re- 
public. He was called li'il- 
liam the Silent because of his 
cautious nature. 

William was born in 
Dillenburg, Germany. His 
parents were Lutherans, 
but William became a Ro- 
man Catholic to please Em- 
peror Charles V, who had 
taken a liking to him. The 
Emperor gave him com- 
mand of troops stationed on the French frontier in 1555. 

In 1556, Charles gave the throne to his son Philip II. 
Philip tried to increase control of the Low Countries 
(Belgium and The Netherlands). When he also tried to 
stamp out the Protestant religion there, William joined 
the Protestant Church. He became the leader of a re- 
bellion against Spain in 1568. 

Although William tried hard to unite all the Low 
Countries in the revolt, he did not succeed. In 1579, the 
seven northern provinces formed a league which later 
became the Dutch Republic. In 1581, Philip put a price 
on William's head, and three years later a half-insane 

assassin killed him. Jane K. Miller 

WILLIAM AND MARY, COLLEGE OF, is a coeduca- 
tional, state-supported college of liberal arts and sciences 
at Williamsburg, V'a. It is the second oldest college in 
the LTnited States, and had its beginnings in Henricopo- 
lis University (see Universities and Colleges [His- 
tory]). William and Mary was founded in 1693 through 
a charter and funds granted by King William III and 
Queen Mary II. Its buildings include the Sir Christo- 
pher Wren, built in 1695; the BrafTerton, in 1723; and 
the President's house, in 1732. 

Courses lead to bachelor's and master's degrees. The 
Marshall-Wythe School of Law offers the degree of 
Master of Law and Taxation, the first of its kind in 
the United States. 

The college lists many famous Americans among its 
former students. These includeThomas Jefferson, James 
Monroe, John Tyler, and John Marshall. George VVash- 
ington received his surveyor's license from William and 



Sir Christopher Wren Building at William and Mary/ 

the oldest American academic building in use, was built in 1695. 

C.jllfijL- uf Williurn .niul Mnry 




Mary in 1749. He served as chancellor of the college 
from 1 788 until his death. 

Phi Beta Kappa, an honorary scholastic society, was 
founded at William and Mary in 1776. The honor 
system was also founded there. See Honor (The Honor 
System); Phi Beta K.^ppa. 

The college was the first in the United States to 
have an elective system of study (1779), a school of 
modern language (1779), and a school of modern his- 
toiy (1803). For enrollment, see Universities and Col- 
leges (table). Davis Y. Paschall 

WILLIAM CAREY COLLEGE. See Universities and 
CoLLEf^Es (table). 

WILLIAM JEWELL COLLEGE. See Universities and 
Colleges (table). 

WILLIAM OF WIED. See Albania (Albanian Inde- 
pendence). 

WILLIAM PENN COLLEGE. See Universities and 
Colleges (table). 

WILLIAM SMITH COLLEGE. See Uni\T£rsities and 
Colleges (table [Hobart and William Smith Colleges]). 

WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. See William (I) of 
England. 

WILLIAM THE SILENT. See William I, Prince of 
Orange. 

WILLIAM WOODS COLLEGE. See Universities and 
Colleges (table). 

WILLIAMS, BEN AMES (L889-1953), was an Ameri- 
can novelist and short-story writer. He is most famous 
for his long Civil War novel A House Divided (1947). It 
was followed in 1953 by The Uneonquered, a novel about 
the period after the Civil War. Williams was born in 
Macon, Miss., and was graduated from Dartmouth Col- 
lege. He became a reporter in Boston and soon began 
to write short stories. He is known for his detective 
stories and stories of life in Maine, as well as for his- 
torical novels. George J. Becker 

WILLIAMS, EMLYN (1905- ), achieved fame in 
England and the LInited States as a playwright, actor, 
and platform reader. He wrote more than 20 plays and 
performed over 150 roles on the stage and in motion 
pictures. He based his play The Corn Is Green (1938) on 
his own experiences as a poor boy in Wales. Williams 
was born at Mostyn, Wales, and studied at Oxford 

L'niversity. Richard Moody 

WILLIAMS, GAAR. See Cartoon (Leading Car- 
toonists). 
WILLIAMS, GEORGE. See Young Men's Christian 

ASSOCI.^TION. 

WILLIAMS, GLUYAS. See Cartoon (Leading Car- 
toonists); Benchlev, Robert C. (picture). 

WILLIAMS, JOHN JAMES (1904- ), won recogni- 
tion as a U.S. Senator for exposing waste and corruption 
in the federal government. A Delaware Republican, he 
began his Senate service in 1947. His investigation of 
the Internal Revenue Service resulted in the discharge 
or imprisonment of several tax officials for accepting 
bribes. Williams also investigated the use of political 
inlkience to obtain government contracts. This investi- 
gation led to the resignation in 1963 of Robert G. Baker 
as Democratic Senate secretary. Williams was born near 
Frankford, Del. Before entering the Senate, he operated 
a feed and grain business. 

WILLIAMS, RALPH VAUGHAN. See Vaugh.\n 
Williams, Ralph. 










Roger Williams' Great Friendship with the Indians Aided in the Establishment of the Rhode Island Colony. 



WILLIAMS, ROGER (1603?- 1683), was a clergyman, 
a founder of tlie cotony of Rhode Island, and a great 
apostle of religious and political liberty. He advocated 
complete religious freedom as a right of the people, 
rather than mere religious toleration that could be 
denied at the government's will. Williams exercised in- 
fluence and set an example which contributed greatly 
to the separation of church and state in the colony of 
Rhode Island and later, in the United States. The 
government he fashioned for the colony became an im- 
portant part of the democratic tradition which was 
later expressed in the United States Constitution. 

Early Years. Williams was born in London, the son 
of a shopkeeper. He was educated at Cambridge Uni- 
versity. He became a student of Sir Edward Coke, the 
great English judge, and served briefly as chaplain to a 
wealthy family. But he was a religious nonconformist at 
the time that King Charles I and Archbishop William 
Laud were persecuting those who dissented from the 
Church of England. 

Williams sailed for New England, and came to Boston 
on Feb. 5, 163 1. When he arrived in America, he re- 
fused an invitation to become minister of the Boston 
church because he believed the church was dishonest in 
not publicly acknowledging its separation from the 
Church of England. In 1633, however, he became min- 
ister of the church at Salem. 

By this time Williams had the reputation of being a 
troublesome person. He asserted that the royal charter 
did not justify taking land which belonged to the 
Indians, and he declared that people should not be 
punished for religious differences. To escape being sent 



back to England by officials of Massachusetts Bay 
Colony, he fled into the wilderness in January, 1636. 
He secured land from the Indians beyond the borders 
of Massachusetts, and founded Providence, later the 
capital of Rhode Island. 

Settles in Rhode Island. Williams established a gov- 
ernment based on the consent of the settlers. It provided 
for frequent elections, a flexible constitution, and local 
home rule. In order to safegtiard this government for the 
colony, he went to England first in 1643 to secure a 
charter, and then in 1651 to save it from others who 
tried to infringe on his grant. His most famous work. 
The Bloudy Tenent of Persecution (1644), was published 
during the first visit and influenced the course of the 
English Civil War. He wrote it as part of a long dispute 
with John Cotton, one of the Puritan leaders of Massa- 
chusetts Bay Colony (see Cotton, John). From 1654 to 
1657, Williams served as the president of the Rhode 
Island colony. 

Williams earned his living by farming and trading 
with the Indians. He was a warm friend of the Indians, 
and compiled a dictionary" of their language. He went 
on missionary journeys among them, and their tmst in 
him helped preserve the peace for all New England. 

For a brief period after his banishment, Williams was 
a Baptist. For most of his life he was an intensely 
religious man, but without a church he could call his 
own. In his 70's, Williams served as a soldier in King 
Philip's War, and when he died he was buried with 
military honors. Rhode Island placed a statue of him 

in Statuary Hall. Winthrop S. Hudson 

See also Baptists; Rhode Isl.\nd (Histor)'). 

261 




Angrus McBean, Londo 

Tennessee Williams 



WILLIAMS, "TED," THEODORE 

WILLIAMS, "TED," THEODORE SAMUEL (1918- ), 

became one of the greatest hitters in baseball history. 
He batted .406 in 1941, the first time any batter had 
reached .400 since 1930. Williams won his sixth Ameri- 
can League batting championship in 1958 at the age of 
40, and, when he retired in 1960, his lifetime bat- 
ting average was .344. He was born in San Diego, Calif, 
and started playing with the Boston Red Sox in 1939. 
He served as a Marine Corps pilot in both World War 
n and the Korean War. Ed Fitzgerald 

WILLIAMS, TENNESSEE (1911- ), is an American 
playw riglil. 1 le won Pulitzer prizes for A Streetcar Nnrricd 
Desire in 1948, and Cat on a Hot Tin Rnnf in 195,5. He 
also won the New York Drama Critics' Circle awards 
for these plays and for The Glass Menagerie (1944). 

He was born Thomas 
l.ANiER Williams in Co- 
lumbus, Miss., and chose 
Tennessee as a pen name. 
After graduating from the 
University of Iowa in 1938, 
he began to write. Williams 
received his first recogni- 
tion in 1940 when the 
Theatre Guild produced 
his Battle of Angels. Later, 
he wrote a series of success- 
ful plays emphasizing the 
vitality of life in its sordid 
as well as its poetic aspects. 
His other plays include 
The Rose Tattoo (1951), Camino Real (1953), Orpheus 
Descending (1957), Sweet Bird of I'outh (1959), The Mght 
of the Iguana (1961), and The Milk Train Doesn't Stop 
Here Anymore (1963). 

Williams' other works include the stories One Arm 
and Other Stories (1948), Hard Candy: A Book of Stories 
(1954); a novel. The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone (1950); 
and the motion picture Baby Dolt (1957). George Fheedley 
WILLIAMS, WILLIAM ( 1 73 1 - 1 8 1 1 ), was a signer of the 
Declaration of Independence. He served for many years 
in Connecticut government. He was a delegate to the 
Continental Congress from 1 776 to 1 778, and in 1 783 
and 1 784. He helped frame the Articles of the Confed- 
eration. He also served in the Connecticut convention 
that ratified the L^nited States Constitution in 1 787. He 
was born in Lebanon, Conn. Rhuard e. Morris 

WILLIAMS, WILLIAM 
CARLOS (1883-1963). was 
an American poet and nov- 
elist. He studied medicine, 
and was a neighbor- 
hood doctor all his life. His 
major work of poeti-y is 
Paterson, completed in 
1958. Its setting is the old 
industrial city in New Jer- 
sey near his birthplace, 
Rutherford. Among his 
other works are Al Q_ue 
Omere(\9\l), Complete Col- 
hcted Poems: 1906-19.38 
( 1 938), Collected Later Poems 

262 



William Carlos Williams 



John D. Schifl 




(1950), and Desert Music (1954). His novels include 
White Mule (1937), and a sequel. In the A/on^- (1940). 

Williams experimented with poetic form. He be- 
lieved that the poet could use everything as his material. 
His famous poem, "Red Wheelbarrow," and his 
"Queen-Ann's-Lace," and "These." have been called 
"the richest and most individualized free veree of the 
period." 

Williams received the National Book Award for 
poetry in 1950. His Autobiography (1951), Selected Essays 
(1954), Selected Letters (1957), and / Wanted to Write a 
Poem (1958), together tell the personal and artistic 
growth of a vi\id and important poet. John Holmes 

WILLIAMS COLLEGE is a privately controlled liberal 
arts school for men at Williamstown, Mass. It operates 
the Hopkins Observatoiy, which was built in 1 828 and 
is the oldest college astronomical observatory in the 
United States. 

In 1835, Williams College became the first American 
college to conduct a scientific expedition. It sent a re- 
search group to Nova Scotia. 

The college was founded in 1793. The Williams 
College color is royal purple, and the athletic teams are 
called the Ephmen. The best-known song is "The 
Mountains." For enrollment, see LTNrvERSiTiES and 
Colleges (table). Ralph r. renzi 

WILLIAMSBURG, Va. (pop. 6,832; alt. 90 ft.), is a 
historic city located on a ridge of the \'irginia Penin- 
sula, seven miles from Jamestown on the James River 
and 12 miles from Yorktown on the York River. For 
location, see Virginia (color map). 

In 1699, the capital of the Virginia Colony was 
moved from Jamestown to Middle Plantation, and re- 
named Williamsburg for King William III of England. 
It was the capital of the colony from 1699 to 1776, and of 
the independent Commonwealth of Virginia from 1 776 
to 1 779. The College of William and Maiy, the second 

The Williamsburg Information Center offers tours and 
numerous other services for tourists who visit the city's historic area. 

Colonial Williamsburs 




WILLIAMSBURG, WHERE 
THE PAST LIVES ON.^ 




The Blacksmith of Williamsburg, dressed in colonial style, The Capitol was the meeting place of Virginia's House of Bur- 
worl&lt;s at his anvil in the Deane Smithy. gesses. Patrick Henry made his Stamp Act speech there in 1765. 




The Thick-walled Powder Magazine was built in 1715 by 
Governor Alexander Spotswood of Virginia, 





The Williamsburg Courthouse, built in 1770 and restored in Hostesses in Colonial Costume greet V\/illiamsburg visitors. 
1932, now houses a large archaeological exhibit. 



The horse-drawn carriage stands in front of the Governor's Paloce. 




In Williamsburg, Va., Mrs. Campbell's Coffee House looks 
like a colonial shop of the 1 700's. The costumed people took 
part in a motion picture showing Williamsburg in colonial days. 

oldest college in America, was founded here in 1693. 

Patrick Henry delivered his famous speech in opposi- 
tion to the Stamp Act in the Capitol at Williamsburg. 
The same building was the scene of the convention of 
1776 which institicted Virginia delegates to the Con- 
tinental Congress to declare for independence. This 
convention also drafted the \'irginia Declaration of 
Rights, which became the model for the Bill of Rights 
in the United States Constitution. During colonial days, 
Williamsburg was the center of Virginia's social, cul- 
tural, and political life. 

In 1779, the capital of Virginia was moved to Rich- 
mond because the movement of population westward 
made a more central location desirable. Williamsburg 
lost much of its colonial charm as modern structures and 
manners gradually replaced the old. During the Civil 
War, Northern troops occupied the city. 

In 1926, the Reverend W. A. R. Goodwin of Wil- 
liamsburg interested John D. Rockefeller, Jr., in restor- 
ing the city to the way it had looked in the 1 700's. 
Many buildings were torn down. More than 300 colo- 
nial homes were restored or rebuilt on the basis of 
authentic information from documents and records 
found in museums and libraries. The shops in the busi- 
ness district are copies of colonial architecture. 

The restoration of Williamsburg has made the city 
a favorite spot for tourists. Many visitors come each 
year to view the historic buildings and gardens. The 
motto of colonial Williamsburg is: ''That the future 
may learn from the past." Francis B. Simkins 

See also Virginia (color pictures). 

WILLIAMSON, HUGH (1735-1819), was one of the 
North Carolina signers of the United States Constitu- 
tion. He also worked for its ratification, and later served 
in Congress from 1 790 to 1 793. Then he moved to New 
York and devoted the rest of his life to literary and 
scientific work. Williamson was born in West Notting- 
ham, Pa. His profession was medicine, but he was also 
a professor of mathematics and a merchant. He was 



Authenticated News 



a friend of Benjamin Franklin, and joined him in many 
ex(&gt;erinients in electricity. Kenneth r. rossman 

WILLIAMSPORT, Pa. (pop. 41,967; alt. 525 ft.), is 
an industrial and trade center in north-central Penn- 
sylvania. It lies on the West Branch of the Susque- 
hanna River (see Pennsylvani.\ [map]). The city makes 
metals and metal products, te.xtiles, foods, chemicals, 
paper, and leather goods. Until the 1870's, Williams- 
port was the sawed-lumber center of the country. A 
number of planing mills and furniture factories still 
operate in the city. 

Williamsport was first settled in 1 756 and was in- 
corporated as a city in 1866. It has a mayor-council 
form of government. s. K. Stevens 

WILLIMANTIC, Conn. (pop. 13,881; alt. 250 ft.), 
often called the Thread City, is one of the nation's lead- 
ing thread and yarn-spinning centers. The city lies on 
the Willimantic River in eastern Connecticut (see Con- 
necticut [map]). Products include plastic and rubber 
goods, printing machinery, covered wire, te.xtiles, and 
parts for aircraft, radio, and radar eciuipment. Willi- 
mantic became a borough in 1833 and a city in 1893. 
It is the home of Willimantic State College. It has a 
mayor-cotmcil form of government. Albert e. Van Dusen 

WILLIMANTIC STATE COLLEGE. See Universities 
AND Colleges (table). 

WILLINGDON, MARQUIS OF (1866-1941), Freeman 
Freeman-'Fhomas, was a British colonial official who 
served as governor-general of Canada froin 1926 to 
1931. After serving in Canada, he became viceroy and 
governor-general of India. In 1936 he was made Lord 
Warden of the Cinque Ports and Chancellor of the 
Order of St. Michael and St. George. Eariier, he was 
governor of Bombay and Madras. He headed the Bo,\er 
Indemnity Committee delegation that visited Canada 
in 192'i. lucien Brault 

WILLKIE, WENDELL LEWIS (1892T944), was the Re- 
publicnn candidate for President of the United States 
in 1940 when Franklin D. Roosevelt ran for a third 
term. Willkic was defeated, but he polled more than 
22,000,000 votes. His running mate for the vice-presi- 
dency was Senator Charles L. McNary of Oregon. 



264 



•flH^^^^EB^ 




Harris &amp; Ewinff 

Wendell L. Willkie 



His political career was one of llie mosl unusual in 
American history. Most of his life he had been a loyal 
member of the Democratic parly, but he became a Re- 
publican in the middle 1930's. He rose to political 
prominence without the aid of a regular political ma- 
chine, and most of his advisers were political amateurs. 
The chant "We want VVilll&lt;ie" from the galleries at the 
1940 Republican National Convention forced many un- 
willing Republican leaders to give him the party nomi- 
nation for President of the United States. 

His Life. Willkie was born on I-'eb. 18, 1892, in El- 
wood, Ind. His first name was originally Lewis and his 
middle name Wendell. 
But when he enlisted in the 
arm\' during World War I, 
the army mistakenly re- 
versed them and he ac- 
cepted the change. He 
studied law at Indiana Uni- 
versity. 

In 1929 he became legal 
adviser to the Common- 
wealth and .Southern Elec- 
tric Utilities Company. 
Four years later he was 
elected the company's 
president. He fought a long 
legal battle against the 
Tennessee N'alley Authority. But when in 1 939 the Su- 
preme Court of the United States refused to consider 
the question of the constitutionality of the authority's 
activities, he sold the properties of the Tennessee Elec- 
tric Power Company, a subsidiary of Commonwealth 
and Soinhern, to the T\'A for $78',000,000. 

His Public Career. Willkie became prominent for his 
opposition to the New Deal of President Roosevelt. He 
favored many of the New Deal's social reforms, but op- 
posed its business regulations. He favored removing con- 
trols and changing the tax system to encourage business 
expansion. He largely agreed with Roosevelt's foreign 
policy. 

After the United States entered World War II, 
Willkie rallied his followers in a program of national 
unity. Roosevelt sent him on a number of visits to 
other countries as his unofficial envoy. After Willkie 
returned from an airplane trip around the world in 
1942, he wrote the book One World (1943). In it 
lie outlined his ideas for international cooperation. 
Willkie entered the Wisconsin primary in the spring of 
1944 as a candidate for the Republican nomination for 
President. He was defeated and announced his retire- 
ment from politics. H.^rvev Wish 
WILLOW is a large group of graceful trees and shrubs 
that usually have slender branches and narrow leaves. 
There are about 300 species (kinds) of willows, and about 
100 of them are native to North America. The smallest 
willow is a tiny shrub about an inch high that grows in 
arctic regions and above the timberline on moimtains. 
The largest willows are stately trees that grow more than 
120 feet high. 

The twigs of the willow are soft, slender, and bend 
easily. Because of this, the wood is used to make bas- 
kets and furniture. Willow wood also produces a high 
grade of charcoal that once was used to make gun- 
powder. The bitter bark yields tannin, a substance 



j^m*^ 



f.,..* 



The Drooping Branches of the Weeping Willow add beauty 
and charm fo parks, and the strong roots prevent soil erosion. 

that is used to tan leather, and salidn, a substance 
that is used by scientists in biochemical tests and as 
a medicine. 

Willows usually grow near water. Sometimes they 
are planted in damp regions so that their roots take 
up water and dry the soil. The roots interlace to form 
a tough network that holds the soil together and pre- 
vents soil erosion. Willows also are planted to provide 
shade and to protect fields from winds. 

Most willows have long, narrow leaves that taper to 
a point and have finely-toothed edges. Some willows 
have small, oval-shaped leaves. 

In early spring, willows produce upright clusters of 
tiny, yellowish-green flowers. These flower clusters are 
called catkins because in some types of willows they re- 
semble a cat's tail. The female flower develops a flask- 
shaped pod that splits open and releases tiny seeds with 
white, silky hairs. 

The black willow is an important tree in the eastern 
United Slates. Most willow lumber comes from the 
black willow. The wood is used mainly for boxes, crates, 
furniture, cabinetwork, caskets, and for artificial limbs. 
The black willow has rough, dark bark. 

Wicker furniture and baskets are usually made from 
young shoots of the shrubby basket willow. The basket 
willow grows in western and central New \'ork, Michi- 
gan, and Europe. 

The white willow is a popular decorative tree. The 
underside of its leaves appears white and silky. The 
crack willow gets its name from the fact that its brittle 
twigs break ofl in high winds. 1 he weeping willow, na- 
tive to China, has graceftfl, drooping branches. The 
pussy willow develops furry catkins, and its twigs are 
often used as decorations. 

Scientific Classification. Willows belong to the willow 
family, Salicaceac. They arc genus Salix. The black wil- 
low is .S". nigra; basket willow is S, viminalis; weeping willow 
is S. babylonica; white willow is 5. alba; crack willow is 
S.Jragilis; pussy willow is 5. discolor. E. L. little, jr. 

Related Articles in World Book include; 
Catkin Osier Tree (picture, 

Leaf (picture. Kinds Pussy Willow Tree Shapes) 

of Leaves) Salicin 

WILLOW HERB. See Fireweed. 



265 



WILLS, HELEN NEWINGTON 

WILLS, HELEN NEWINGTON (1906- ), won more 
major tennis championships than any other woman in 
the world. She won the United States women's title 
seven times and the British championship at \Vimblcdon 
eight times. She was noted for her ability to hit the ball 
harder than any woman she faced and for poise that 
earned her the name "Little Miss Poker Face." She won 
her first U.S. women's tournament in 1923, and retired 
after winning at Wimbledon in 1938. She was born at 
Centerville, Calif. Her name during part of her playing 
career was Helen Wills Moodv. Pat Harmon 

WILLSTATTER, VILshteth. RICHARD (1872-1942), 
a German chemist, won the 1915 Nobel prize for chem- 
istry for his work on the chemical nature of chloro- 
phyll. His studies on cellulose led to a method for mak- 
ing glucose from wood. He also studied the blood, and 
fruit and flower pigments. Willstatter believed that the 
highest goal of science was the improvement of the lot 
of humanity. He was especialh' proud of his synthesis of 
narcotic drugs, including cocaine. Willstatter was born 

in Karlsruhe. K. L. Kaufman 

WILLYS, JOHN NORTH. See Automobile (Famous 
Men). 

WILMINGTON, Del. (pop. 95,827; met. area 414,565; 
alt. 135 ft.), is an industrial and commercial center. It 
is most famous as the home of the E. I. du Pont de 
Nemours Company. In peacetime, this giant corpora- 
tion is one of the largest producers of chemicals, plas- 
tics, and synthetic cloth and dyes in the United States. 
During Worid Wars I and II, the Du Pont Company 
produced a large part of the explosives used by the 
Allied armed forces. 

Location, Sire, and Descripfion. Wilmington lies on 
the Delaware River in the northern part of the state, 
at the point where the Delaware receives the waters of 
the Brandywine and Christina rivers. The city is built 
on high land at their junction. The city's marine termi- 
nal stands near the point where the Christina empties 
into the Delaware. Wilmington is the largest city in the 
state. Philadelphia, Pa., lies 27 miles northeast of Wil- 
mington, and Baltimore is 69 miles to the southwest. 
For location, see Delaware (political map). 

Cultural Life. Wilmington has excellent public school 
and library systems. The Historical Society of Delaware, 
the Academy of Medicine, and the Delaware Art Cen- 
ter are leading cultural centers. The most famous church 
in the city is the Old Swedes Church, built in 1698. 
Wilmington parks cover about 700 acres. 

Industry and Transportation. The leather industry 
is important in Wilmington. Several big factories are 
engaged in tanning hides for leather. The city also has 
fiber factories and plants that dye, bleach, and finish 
cotton fabrics. Other industries include foundries and 
machine shops, and paper mills. 

Three railroads, and interurban and motorbus lines 
serve the city. Freighters go from Wilmington harbor to 
Atlantic and Pacific Coast ports, and to Europe. 

History. The first settlement on the site of Wilming- 
ton was Fort Christina. A group of Swedish colonists 
under Peter Minuit founded it in 1638. In 1655, the 
Dutch, who took possession of the settlement under 
Peter Stuyvesant, changed the name to Altena. In 1 664, 
the settlement was seized by British forces acting in the 

266 



name of the Duke of York, brother of Charles II of 
England. The settlement's name was changed to Will- 
ington in 1731 to honor Thomas Willing, who laid out 
the plans foi' the town. The name became Wilmington 
in 1 739 when it was incorporated as a borough. 

In 1802, Eleuthere Irenee du Pont de Nemours built 
a powder mill on the outskirts of the city. Wilmington 
received its city charter in 1832. Railroads first con- 
nected Wilmington with Philadelphia and Baltimore 
in 1837. Rapid growth of industry and population soon 
followed. Wilmington is now a chemical industry center. 
It has a mayor-council government. John a. Monroe 

See also Du Pont Company'. 

WILMINGTON, N.C. (pop. 44,013; alt. 25 ft.), is the 
chief deepwater port of North Carolina. It lies in the 
southeastern part of the state (see North Carolina 
[political map]). During World War II, Wilmington be- 
came a boom town because of its shipbuilding and other 
war industries. It is a leading Atlantic Coast distribution 
point for bulk petroleum. Wilmington was settled aboiu 
1 728 as New Liverpool. It was incorporated in 1 739 and 
renamed for the Earl of Wilmington. It has a council- 
manager form of government. 

The headquarters occupied during the Revolutionary 
War by the British general, Lord Cornwallis, may be 
seen here. Wilmington was the leading blockade-run- 
ning port for the Confederacy during the Civil War, and 
the last port to fall to L'nion forces. Hugh t. Lefler 

WILMINGTON COLLEGE. See Universities and 
Colleges (table). 

WILMOT, DAVID(1814-1868), a Pennsylvania Demo- 
crat, served in the United States House of Representa- 
tives from 1845 to 1851. He sponsored the Wilmot Pro- 
viso in 184(i. The proviso, an amendment to a bill in 
the House of Representatives, would have forbidden 
slavery in territory that the L'nited States gained from 
the Mexican War. The amendment was approved by 
the House of Representatives but was rejected by the 
Senate. Wilmot helped found the Republican party in 
1854. He was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1861 as a 
Republican. Wilmot was born in Bethany, Pa. 

WILMOT PROVISO, proh VT zoh. President James 
K. Polk asked Congress in August, 1846, to appropriate 
$2,000,000 to negotiate a peace with Mexico, then at 
war with the United States. The President hoped to 
purchase new territory for the United States from 
Mexico. David Wilmot, a Democratic Representative 
from Pennsylvania, offered an amendment to the bill 
in the House of Representatives. This amendment, 
called the ]\'ibnot Proviso, declared that slavery should 
be forbidden in any territory obtained by the United 
States with the $2,000,000. 

The House of Representatives approved the amend- 
ment on Feb. 15, 1847. But the Senate, where Southern 
representation was stronger, refused to pass it. For sev- 
eral years the proviso was offered unsuccessfully as an 
amendment to many bills. It became the basis for bitter 
debate over the issue of slavery in tlie territories. The 
issue was settled in 1862, when Congress banned 
slavery in any Lhiited States territory. Norman a. Graebner 

WILNO. .See Vilnius. 

WILSON, N.C. (pop. 28,753; alt. 140 ft.), is the largest 
bright-leaf tobacco market in the Western Hemisphere. 
Every year, the city markets from 50,000,000 to 90,000,- 
000 pounds of tobacco, worth from $30,000,000 to 



$54,000,000. Wilson lies in the upper coastal plain area 
of the state, in the heart of the bright-leaf tobacco belt. 
It is the home of Atlantic Christian College. It has a 
council-manager government. For location, see North 
Carolina (political map). huom t. leflf.r 

WILSON, ALLEN BENJAMIN. See Sewing Machine 
(History). 

WILSON, CHARLES ERWIN (1890-1961), an Ameri- 
can business executive and government official, sei-ved 
as Secretary of Defense from 1953 to 1957 under Presi- 
dent Dwight D. Eisenhower. He was president of Gen- 
eral Motors Corporation from 1941 to 1953. 

Born in Minei-va, Ohio, Wilson was graduated from 
Carnegie Institute of Technology. He worked as an 
electrical engineer for the Westinghouse Electric and 
Manufacturing Company until 1919. He became presi- 
dent of Delco Remy Company, a subsidiai-y of General 
Motors Corporation, in 1926, and vice-president of Gen- 
eral Motors in 1929. v. e. Cangelosi and r. e. westmeyer 
WILSON, CHARLES THOMSON REES (1869-1959), a 
British physicist, invented the Wilson cloud chamber in 
1912 (see Wilson Cloud Chamber). This device made 
the tracks of high-speed atomic and nuclear particles 
visible by means of trails of water droplets condensed 
on the ions produced along their paths. It proved to be 
such a valuable research tool that Wilson shared the 
1927 Nobel prize for physics. Wilson also did research 
on atmospheric electricity and on the absorption of 
penetrating radiation. Wilson was born at Glencorse, 
Scotland. He entered Owens College in Manchester 
at the age of 15. a. gamow 

WILSON, EDMUND (1895- ), is an American 
writer, known as a literary and social critic. His works 
include poetry, fiction, and drama. He wrote Axel's 
Castle (1931), To the Fmla&gt;id Station (1940), The Triple 
Thinkers (1938), The Jl'ound and the Bow (1941). Tlic 
Scrolls from the Dead Sea (1955), Patriotic Gore: Studies in 
the Literature of the American Civil War (1962), and The 
Cold War and the Income Ta.v (1963). Wilson also helped 
edit Vanity Fair and A^eiv Republic magazines. He re- 
ceived the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1963. He 
was born at Red Bank, N.J. James vvoodress 

WILSON, HAROLD (1916- ), became Prime Min- 
ister of Great Britain in October, 1 964, one year after 
he became leader of the British Labour party. 

Wilson was first elected 
to Pariiament in 1945. He 
became president of the 
Board of Trade in the La- 
J J^i hour government in 1947, 

W&gt;- jMw iy '. ^jjB t H^ resigned in 1951 after 

a 9K9 Wfe • a dispute over government 

policy. 

Wilson was graduated 
from O.xford University 
with first class honors and 
taught economics there 
from 1937 until World 
War II. He served in the 
Ministry of Fuel and 
Power during the war. He 
became parliamentary secretaiy for the Ministry of 
Works in 1945 and Secretary of Overseas Trade in 
1947. James Harold Wilson was born in Huddersfield, 
Yorkshire. c. l. mowat 





Litirary of Congress 

Henry Wilson 



;amcTa Priss Pix frt.m Puhlix 

Harold Wilson 



WILSON, WILLIAM LYME 

WILSON, HENRY (1812-1875). served as Vice-Presi- 
dent of the United States from 1873 to 1875 under 
President Ulysses S. Grant. He was also a Republican 
U.S. Senator from Massachusetts from 1855 to 1873. 

Wilson helped found the Republican party. He served 
in both houses of the Mas- 
sachusetts state legislature, 
but was defeated when he 
ran for governor in 1853. 
Wilson was chairman of 
the Senate Military Affairs 
Committee during the 
Civil War, and a "'Radical 
Republican" during Re- 
construction (.see Recon- 
struction). He was im- 
plicated in the Credit 
Mobilier scandal of 1872 
(see Credit Mobilier of 
America). 

Wilson was born Jere- 
miah Jones CoLBAiTH at Farmington, N.H., but later 
changed his name. He worked as a farmhand in his 
youth and had little formal schooling, but he was an 
avid reader. He moved to Natick, Mass., in 1833, and 
became a shoe manufacturer. He was called the Natick 
Cobbler. He wrote the History of the Rise and Fall of the 
Slave Power in America. Irvino g. Williams 

WILSON, JAMES (1742-1798), was a Pennsylvania 
signer of the Declaration of Independence and the 
United States Constitution. In 1774, he wrote a widely 
circulated pamphlet in which he rejected the British 
Parliament's legislative authority over the American 
colonies. Later, he became active in the movement to 
increase the power of the United States government, 
and played an important role in the Constitutional 
Convention of 1 787. He was a leader of the forces 
in the Pennsylvania convention that favored ratifying 
the Constitution. He was an associate justice of the 
Supreme Court of the United States from 1 789 to 1 798. 
Born and educated in Scotland, Wilson came to Amer- 
ica in 1 765. Richard B. Morris 

WILSON, JOHN. See North, Christopher. 

WILSON, WILLIAM BAUCHOP (1862-1934), was the 
first Secretary of Labor of the United States. Appointed 
by President Woodrow Wilson in 1913, he served as 
Secretary until 1921. During World War I, he was a 
member of the Coimcil of National Defense. He served 
in Congress as a Democratic representative from Penn- 
sylvania for six years. He was born at Blantyre, Scot- 
land, and came to the LI.S. in 1870. 

WILSON, WILLIAM LYNE (1843-1900), a West Vir- 
ginia Democrat, sei-ved as Postmaster General of the 
United States from 1895 to 1897. While Postmaster 
General, Wilson established rural free deliveiy in the 
United States. Wilson served in the L'.S. Flouse of 
Representatives from 1883 to 1895. 

Wilson was born in Jefferson Cotuity, Virginia (now 
West Virginia). He was graduated from the law school 
of Columbian College, Washington, D.C. Wilson served 
as president of West Virginia L'niversity in 1882, and 
of Washington and Lee University from 1897 until his 
death. 



267 



WOODROW WILSON 



J^Z^^ 





T, ROOSEVELT 
26lh President 
1901 — 1909 




TAFT 
27lh President 
1909 — 1913 



WILSON, WOODROW (I856-I924). led the L'nited 
States through World War I and gained lasting fame 
as a champion of worid peace and democracN'. Wilson 
was one of the most remarkable men in American his- 
toiy. Before reaching the height of popularity as a 
world statesman, he had achieved success in two other 
careers. First, as a scholar, teacher, and university presi- 
dent, he greatly influenced the course of education. 
Then, as a political leader, he brought successful legis- 
lative reforms to state and national government. .So 
great were his achievements that Wilson would have 
won a place in histoiy even if he had been active in only 
one of his three careers. 

Wilson was first of all a scholar. Even his physical 
appearance was like the popular idea of a scholar. He 
was thin, of medium height, and wore glasses. His high 
forehead, firm mouth, and jutting jaw all gave signs 
of thoughtfulness as well as strength. Because Wilson 
was a scholar, he felt more at home in the world of 
books and ideas than in the world of politics. Some 
of his personal qualities made it hard for him to get 
along with people. He rarely doubted the complete 
rightness of his own opinions. When more practical 
men might have compromised, Wilson often was stub- 
born and headstrong. He remained cold and unforgiv- 
ing toward those who clashed with him. He could turn 
warm friends into bitter enemies by his lack of patience, 
and by his habit of telling others their faults. These 
character traits brought Wilson much grief, both in his 
educational career and in politics. 

Yet historians consider Wilson one of the three or 
four most successful Presidents. They agree that, as 
a spokesman for mankind in a period of world crisis, 
he stood for integrity, purity of purpose, and responsi- 
bility. Not even Wilson's enemies suggested he was 
either weak or stupid. They knew he was honest, and 



IMPORTANT DATES IN WILSON'S LIFE 



1 856 (Dec. 28) Born at Staunton, Va. 

1885 (June 24) Married Ellen Louise Axson, 

1 902 (June 9) Named president of Princeton University, 

1910 (Nov. 8) Elected governor of Nev^ Jersey. 

1912 (Nov. 5) Elected President of the United States, 

1914 (Aug, 6) Mrs, Ellen Wilson died, 

1915 (Dec. 18) Married Mrs. Edith Boiling Gait. 

1916 (Nov. 7) Re-elected President. 

1919 (Sept. 26-Oct. 3) Suffered collapse ond stroke. 

1920 (Dec. 10) Awarded Nobel prize for peace. 
1924 (Feb. 3) Died in Washington, D.C, 

268 



that not even friendship could turn him aside from what 
he thought was right. 

.\ minority of the voters elected Wilson to the presi- 
dency in 1912. That year the Republicans split their 
votes between President William Howard Taft and for- 
mer President Theodore Roosevelt. In 1916, the people 
re-elected Wilson, partly because "He kept us out of 
war." Five months later, German submarines resumed 
unrestricted attacks on .\merican ships, Wilson went 
before Congress and called for war. ."Kfter the war ended 
in 1918. the President fought for a peace treaty that in- 
cluded a League of Nations. He saw this dream crumble 
in 1920 with the election of one of the nation's most 
conservative Presidents, Warren G. Harding, 

In many ways, the Wilson era separated an old 
.■\merica from the modern nation of todav. In 1910, 
when Wilson was elected governor of New Jersey, a 
majority of Americans lived on farms or in rural regions. 
By 1 920, toward the end of Wilson's presidency, farm- 
ers had become a minority group in the L'nited States. 
In 1910. Americans drove fewer than 500.000 automo- 
biles. By 1920, more than 8,000,000 cars, many of them 
Model T Fords, crowded the highways. Throughout 
this brief period of 10 years, the speeding-up in the 
nation's way of life could be seen in many ways. The 
electrical industry grew rapidly, skyscrapers rose in 
large cities, machinery revolutionized farm life, and 
good roads began to crisscross the countiy. 

The period also brought great social changes. From 
1910 to about 1914. .Americans lived largely in a world 
of unchanging moral values and ronrantic ideals. These 
were reflected in the [popularity of such books as Zane 
Grey's Riikrs of the Purple Snge and Jean Webster's 
Daddy Long Legs. New currents began to stir the main- 
stream of .Xmerican culture about 1914. One was the 
development of motion pictures, which became popu- 
lar during Wilson's administration. Another was the 
increasing popularity of jazz music, which first ap- 
peared on phonograph records in 1917. World War I 
revolutionized social life in .\merica. It began a wave 
of far-reaching social changes, including the prohibi- 
tion of liquor, giving women the right to vote, and the 
migration of Negroes from the South to the North. 

Early Years 

Childhood. Woodrow Wilson was born on Dec. 28, 
18.")t), at Staunton, \'a. He was the third of the four 






HARDING 
29lh President 
1921 — 1923 



COOLIDGE 
30th President 
1923 — 1929 



28TH PRESIDENT 
OF THE 

UNITED STATES 
1913-1921 



Painting by F. Graham Cootes in the White House Collection 



children of Joseph Ruggles Wilson and Janet "Jessie" 
Woodrow VVilson. The Wilsons named their second son 
Thomas Woodrow. As a child, he was called "Tommy," 
but he dropped the name Thomas soon after being 
graduated from college. 

Wilson's father, a Presbyterian minister, had grown 
up in Ohio. James Wilson, his grandfather, was a 
Scotch-Irish immigrant who had become a well-known 
Ohio newspaperman and legislator. Wilson's mother 
was born in Carlisle, England, near the border of Scot- 
land. Her Scottish father, also a Presbyterian minister, 
brought his family to the United States when Janet 
was 9 years old. 

An atmosphere of religious piety and scholarly in- 
terests dominated Wilson's early years. From the time 
of his birth, he lived among people who were deeply 
religious, believed in Presbyterian doctrines, and 
stressed the importance of education. 

Wilson was a thin, high-strung child who had to wear 
glasses. His mother called him ''a mischievous bundle 
of nerves." Before he was 2, his family moved to Au- 



gusta, Ga., where his father had accepted a pastorate. 
Between the ages of 4 and 8, Wilson lived in an atmos- 
phere colored by the Civil War. His earliest memory 
was of a passer-by shouting in great excitement that 
Abraham Lincoln had been elected President and that 
war would follow. During the war, Joseph Wilson, a 
strong Southern sympathizer, turned his church into a 
hospital for wounded Confederate soldiers. 

Education. Wilson did not begin school until he was 
9, partly because he was a frail child and partly because 
the war had closed many schools. But his father taught 
the boy much at home. On weekdays, the minister 
would take him to visit a corn mill, a cotton gin, or 
some other plant. During the war, they visited ammu- 
nition factories and iron foundries in Augusta. After 
these trips, Wilson always had to discuss what he had 
seen, because his father believed the e.\act expression 
of ideas was necessary for clear understanding. At home, 
the Wilsons read the Bible together every day, and 
gathered to sing hymns on .Sunday evenings. 

In 1870, Wilson's father became a professor in the 

269 




Wilson's Birthplace, above, stands in 

Staunton, Va. It is now a historic site. 
Wilson Had Three Daughters by hh first 
wife. Left to right are Margaret, Mrs. Ellen 
Wilson, Eleanor, Jessie, and Wilson. 



Presbyterian theological seminary at Columbia, S.C. 
Three years later, when Wilson was 17, he entered 
Davidson College at Davidson, N.C. The school still 
suffered from the effects of the war. Davidson students 
had to carry their own water and firewood, as well as 
perform other chores. Wilson was not strong, and his 
health began to fail. He left Davidson after his fresh- 
man year. 

In a few months, Wilson regained his health. In 
September, 1875, he enrolled in the College of New 
Jersey (now Princeton University) at Princeton. N.J. 
While a student, Wilson practiced public speaking, 
became a leader in debating, and read the lives of 
great British statesmen. During his senior year, he 
sei-ved as managing editor of the college newspaper, 
the Prmcetonian. 

Wilson refused to compete for the senior debating 
medal when he was asked to argue in favor of a pro- 
tective tariff. He believed so strongly in free trade that 
nothing could make him argue against it. In 1879, 
Wilson was graduated from Princeton, 38th in a class 
of 106. He planned a career in public life. 

In October, Wilson entered the University of Vir- 
ginia Law School at Charlottesville, \'a. He felt that 
law would provide the best path to the career he de- 
sired. Wilson took an active part in the university's 
debating societies. He withdrew from school in 188! 
because of ill health. 

Beginning Career 

Lawyer. In 1882, Wilson established a law office in 
Atlanta, Ga. He attracted few clients, and spent much 
of his time reading and studying current political 
problems. By the autumn of 1883, Wilson realized that 
he was not suited to be a lawyer. He decided to become 
a college teacher, and began graduate study in history 
and politics at Johns Hopkins University in Balti- 
more, Md. 

Graduate Student. At Johns Hopkins, Wilson came 
into contact with brilliant, thoughtful men. He worked 
hard to improve his writing style and to master histoiy 
and political science. In 1885, Wilson published his 
first book. Congressional Government, A Study in American 
Politics. Educators, lawmakers, and students praised 




ijLT of Commerce; Culver 



his analysis of the federal government and of American 
legislative practices. Wilson later presented this study 
as his doctoral thesis, and Johns Hopkins awarded him 
the Pli.D. degree in June, 1886. 

Wilson's Family. In 1883, Wilson made a business 
trip to Rome, Ga. There he met and fell in love with 
Ellen Louise Axson (May 15, 1860-Aug. 6, 1914), the 
daughter of a Presbyterian minister. They were married 
on June 24, 1885. 

Mrs. Wilson became the most influential person in 
her husband's life. She appreciated his talents and 
greatness, and svmpathized with his ideals. Mrs. Wilson 
had many literaiy and artistic interests. But she de- 
voted most of her time to making a comfortable home 
where her husband could rela.\ from the cares of his 
work. 

The Wilsons liad three daughters: Margaret Wood- 
row Wilson (1886-1944), Jessie Woodrow Wilson (1887- 
1933), and Eleanor Randolph Wilson (1889- ). 
Wilson was tender and affectionate, and enjoyed noth- 
ing more than rollicking with his children or telling 
them stories at the dinner table. Like his father, Wilson 
spent many evenings reading Scott, Dickens, or Words- 
worth aloud to his family. He often played charades 
with his daughters, and once dressed up in a velvet cur- 
tain, feather scarf, and one of his wife's hats to look 
like an old lady. 

Teacher. In the autumn of 1885, Wilson began a 
three-year period as associate professor of history at 
Bryn Mawr College, a woman's school in Br\'n Mawr, 
Pa. He then became professor of history and political 
economy at Wesleyan University in Middletown, Conn. 
Wilson also coached football at Wesleyan, and devel- 
oped one of the school's greatest teams. He told his 
players: "Go in to win. Don't admit defeat before you 
start." In 1889, Wilson published The State, a textbook 
in comparative government. This book is considered 
his most important scholarly work. In 1890, Princeton 
L'niversity invited him to become professor of juris- 
prudence and political economy. 

University President 

■•\t Princeton. Wilson's reputation as a scholar and 
teacher grew steadily. He worked constantly to express 



270 




As President of Princeton, 

from 1902 to 1910, Wilson 
won national fame as an edu- 
cational reformer. 

his thoughts precisely in 
writing. He also became a 
popular and distinguished 
lecturer. On June 9, 1902, 
the Princeton trustees 
unanimously elected Wil- 
son president of the imi- 
versity. Never before had 
anyone but a clergyman 
held this position. 

.-\s soon as Wilson took 
office, he announced his 
intention to change Prince- 
ton from '"a place where 
there are youngsters doing 
tasks to a place where there 
are men thinking." But his 
belief that ''the object of 

a university is simply and entirely intellectual" found 
lillle support among students devoted largely to social 
events and athletics. 

Wilson helped to reorganize the university's under- 
graduate course program. He introduced a new method 
of teaching which he called the Prnrptorial System. He 
believed that this system, using individual instruction 
by tutors, would bring students and teachers into a 
closer relationship. He also believed it would help 
students organize scattered information from their un- 
dergraduate programs and from general reading. 

Wilson's educational reforms won high praise from 
the few who understood them. But what brought the 
president of Princeton to public attention was his fight 
to reform the eating-clubs. These organizations some- 
what resembled the fraternities of other schools. Some 
of the clubs had restricted their memberships and be- 
come exclusive. Wilson felt that the clubs were un- 
democratic and detracted from the intellectual life of 
Princeton. He wanted to replace them by rebuilding 
the university with separate colleges, each arranged in 
a quadrangle around a central court. Each college 
would have its own dormitories, eating hall, master, 
and tutors. Wilson felt this arrangement, which became 
known as the Qimd Plan, would stimulate the intellec- 
tual life of the university. 

At first, many Princeton students, including mem- 
bers of the clubs, approved Wilson's idea. But the 
alumni disliked the plan because they enjoyed coming 
back to their clubs at reunions and football games. 
Bitter feelings were aroused. Finally, the board of 
trustees asked Wilson to withdraw his proposal. Twenty 
years later. Hai-vard and Yale both adopted a form of 
Wilson's Quad Plan. In this, Wilson proved himself an 
educator ahead of his time. 

Wilson suffered a second defeat in the development 
of plans for Princeton's graduate school. He tried to 
integrate this school with the undergraduate college. He 
believed such a move would make the graduate school 
more responsive to his authority and establish it as the 
center of intellectual life on the campus. Andrew West, 
Dean of the Graduate College, opposed Wilson's plan. 
The two men even battled over the location of a pro- 



WILSON, WOODROW 

posed new building for tlic graduate school. The bitter 
fight ended in defeat for Wilson. A wealthy graduate 
died and left several million dollars to the graduate 
school on condition that West remain in charge. 

Wilson's struggles at Princeton attracted wide public 
notice. Newspapers reported the argument over the 
Quad Plan as a fight by Wilson for democracy and 
against snobbery. He was pictured as a man who 
favored the common people against the rich and 
powerful. Such a picture distorted Wilson's main 
objectives, but it made him politically appealing. 

Governor of Ne^ Jersey 

James Smith, Jr.. the Democratic party boss in New 
Jersey, began to think of Wilson as a possible candidate 
for governor. The party's record was so bad that it 
needed a candidate whose honesty was above question. 
At this same time, Colonel George B. M. Harvey, a 
party leader and the editor of Harpefs Weekly, also 
became interested in Wilson. Smith and Harvey 
together could almost control the nomination for 
governor, and they offered it to Wilson. 

They timed their offer well. Because of his disap- 
pointments at Princeton, Wilson was ready to change 
jobs. As a scholar in the field of government, he knew 
the facts of machine politics. He suspected that .Smith 
planned to use him for some piupose of his own. But 
Wilson wanted to rim for governor as the first step 
toward the White House, and Smith badly needed 
Wilson. The two men agreed, therefore, not to attempt 
to control each other. 

On Oct. 20, 1910, Wilson resigned from Princeton 
to campaign for governor. The power and eloquence 
of his campaign speeches stirred voters throughout the 
state. He was elected by the largest majority received 
by a Democrat in New Jersey up to that time. 

Political Reformer. Wilson at once made it clear that 
he wanted nothing to do with the dishonest practices 
of the Democratic machine headed by Smith. Smith, 
who had previously served in the U.S. Senate, decided 
to run for that office again. At that time. Senators were 
elected by the state legislatures. If no candidate re- 
ceived a majority of the votes in each house of a legisla- 
ture, both houses met in joint session to elect a Senator. 
Wilson's victory had given the Democrats a majority 
in the joint session of the New Jersey legislature. When 
Smith refused to withdraw, Wilson endorsed a rival 
candidate who won. .\ reporter wrote that Wilson had 
"licked the gang to a frazzle." 

Meanwhile, Wilson was pushing a series of reforms 
through the legislature. These laws changed New Jersey 
from one of the most conservative states into one of the 
most progressive. During its first session, the legislature 
enacted the most important proposals of Wilson's 
campaign. It passed a primary-election law, a corrupt- 
practices act, a public-utilities act, and an employers' 
liability law. At Wilson's urging, it also passed various 
school-reform laws, and enacted a law permitting 
cities to adopt the commission form of government. 
Wilson did not hesitate to break long-established 
customs in his political fights. He hired a superintend- 
ent of schools from outside the state. He frequently 
asked the advice of members of the legislature, and 



270a 



WILSON, WOODROW 



turned up unexpectedly at some of their private meet- 
ings. He sometimes appealed directly to the people, 
over the heads of legislators and officials. 

Presidential Candidate. Wilson's reforms in New 
Jersey brought him national attention at an opportune 
time. The progressi\'e wing of the Democratic party was 
seeking a presidential candidate to replace William 
Jennings Bryan, who had been defeated three times. 
By 1911, Wilson had clearly become a candidate for 
the nomination. He started speaking on national issues 
throughout the countp.'. and progressive Democrats 
began to support him. Most importantly. Wilson won 
the confidence of Bnan. the [)art&gt;"s official leader. 

The Democratic national convention met at Balti- 
more in June. 1912. Champ CUark of Missouri. .Speaker 
of the House of Representatives, received a majority of 
the delegates' votes on the 10th ballot. Not since 1844 
had a candidate who gained a majority failed to go on 
and receive the two-thirds vote then necessarv for 
nomination. But Wilson's followers stayed with him. 
On the 14th ballot. Br\-an swung his support to Wilson. 
The old progressive rose dramatically in the crowded 
convention hall to explain his vote. He pointed out 
that Charles Francis Murphy, the boss of New York 
Cit)''s Tammany Hall machine, had thrown his support 
to Clark. He said he could never vote for Clark as long 
as the .Speaker had Tammany's support. From this 
point on (although not necessarih' because of Bryan's 
change of vote). Wilson gained slowly until the 46th 
ballot, when he won the nomination. Tlie convention 
nominated Governor Thomas R. Marshall of Indiana 
for \'ice-President. 

Wilson's nomination meant almost certain election, 
because the Republican party was badly split. Conserv- 
ative Republicans had renominated President William 
Howard Taft. Progressive Republicans then formed a 
new Progressive party that nominated former President 
Theodore Roosevelt. In a series of campaign speeches, 
later published as The Xetv Freedom, Wilson stirred the 
public with his understanding of national problems. 

The popular vote, overwhelmingly for Wilson and 
Roosevelt, was a clear endorsement of a liberal reform 
program. Wilson received 43.5 electoral votes; Roose- 
velt, 88; and Taft. 8. 

Wilson's First Administration (1913-1917) 

Inauguration. Dtu'ing his inauguration on March 4. 
191,3. Wilson noticed that a wide space had been 
cleared in front of the speaker's platform. He motioned 
to the police holding back the crowd and ordered: "Let 
the people come forward." His supporters said the 
phrase expressed the spirit of his administration. 

In his inaugural address, the President accepted the 
challenge of the November landslide that had also 
swept a Democratic Congress into office. "No one can 
mistake the purpose for which the nation now seeks to 
use the Democratic party," he declared. "It seeks to 
use it to interpret a change in its plans and point of 
view." Among the laws that needed to be changed. 
Wilson named those governing tariffs, industry', and 
the banking system. 

Wilson was the last President to ride to his inaugura- 
tion in a horse-drawn carriage. Neither he nor his wife 

270b 



Boarding a Ship for Europe 
after World War I, Wilson led 
the U.S. delegation to the Paris 
Peace Conference. The Pres- 
ident hoped to get Allied 
approval of his Fourteen Points. 




liked large social affairs, so the Wilsons did not give an 
inaugural ball. On March 15. only 11 days after his 
inauguration. Wilson held the first regular presidential 
press conference. He felt that the people were entitled 
to reports on the progress of his administration. 

Legislative Program. Wilson called Congress into 
special session on April 7. 1913. to consider a new 
tariff bill. For the first time since the presidency of 
Thomas Jefferson, the President personally delivered 
his legislative requests to Congress. In October, after 
some debate. Congress passed Wilson's first important 
reform measure, the L'nderwood Tariff .Act. This law 
lowered rates on imports, and removed all tariffs from 
wool, sugar, iron ore, steel rails, and many other items. 
.After signing the bill, Wilson remarked: "1 liave had 
the accomplishment of something like this at heart 
ever since I was a boy." 

On June 23, as C^ongress debated the tariff' bill. 
Wilson presented his program for reform of the banking 
and currency laws. He spoke of this reform as "the 
second step in setting the business of this country free." 
Representative Carter Glass of Virginia introduced a 
bill to establish a central banking system. It was de- 
signed to provide a new currency and to help the flow 
of capital through 12 reserve banks, under the direc- 
tion of a Federal Reserve Board. Congress debated the 
bill hotly for six months. In December, it passed the 
Federal Reserve .\ct basicalK- in the form the President 
had recommended. Amendments also provided for 

WILSON'S FIRST ELECTION 

Place of Nominating Convention . . . Baltimore 

Ballot on Whicli Nominated 46th 

Progressive Opponent Theodore Roosevelt 

Republican Opponent William Howard Taft 

Electoral Vote 435 (Wilson) to: 

88 (Roosevelt) 
8 (Taft) 

Popular Vote 6,293,454 (Wilson) to: 

4,119,538 (Roosevelt) 
3,484,980 (Taft) 

Age at Inauguration 56 




Landing in France, Wilson met U.S. troops, 
above. In Paris, he conferred with David Lloyd 
George of Britain, Vittorio Orlando of Italy, 
and Georges Clemenceau of France, righi. 
These leoders formed the Allied "Big Four." 



United Press Int. 



exclusive governmental control of the Federal Reserve 
Board and for short-term agricultural credit through 
the new reserve banks. This act is regarded as the most 
effective banking and currency bill in the nation's 
history. .See Feder.\l Reserve System. 

Wilson also asked for a series of other reforms. In 
1914, Congress established the Federal Trade Commis- 
sion to investigate and stop unfair trade practices (see 
Feder.\l Trade Commission). That same year, it 
passed the Clayton Antitmst Act which increased the 
power of the federal government to police unfair prac- 
tices of big business. Congress also enacted a new Pure 
Food Law to protect consumers. In 1916, Congress 
passed the Adamson Act, which established an eight- 
hour working day for railroad employees. Between 1913 
and 1916, Congress also approved several bills to aid 
farmers. These included measures which made it easier 
for farmers to boiTow government lunds and provided 
for the improvement of rural education. 

Foreign Affairs demanded much of the President's 
attention. He persuaded Congress to repeal the Panama 
Tolls i^ct, which had allowed American ships to use 
the Panama Canal toll-free when sailing between U.S. 
coastal ports. Wilson believed this law violated a treaty 
with Great Britain. The President also refused to ap- 
prove a bankers' loan to China, and put himself on 
record against "dollar diplomacy" (see Doll.ar Diplo- 
uacy). Wilson insisted that his party live up to its 
campaign promise of preparing the Philippines for 
independence. In 1916, Congress passed the Jones Bill, 
which greatly increased Philippine self-government and 
made many reforms in the administration of the islands. 

Crisis in Mexico. Relations between the United 
States and Mexico were frequently troubled during 
Wilson's first administration. In 1913, the President 
told Congress that there could be no peace in Mexico 
while Victoriano Huerta ruled as dictator. Wilson de- 
clared that the United States "can have no sympathy 
with those who seek to seize the powers of government 
to advance their own personal interests or ambition." 
Wilson tried unsuccessfully to negotiate for Huerta's 
retirement. Then the President permitted the dictator's 



enemies, who had begun a revolution, to obtain arms 
in the United States. Wilson let the Mexican groups 
fight it out for a while. But when Huerta's forces arrested 
1 4 American sailors who had gone ashore at Tampico, 
Mexico, the President struck hard. He refused to 
accept Huerta's apology, and demanded that Huerta 
publicly salute the American flag in Tampico. When 
Huerta refused, Wilson in April, 1914, ordered Ameri- 
can forces to occupy the Mexican port of Veracruz. 
Eighteen Americans were killed in the action. 

At this point, Wilson accepted an offer of the .^BC 
powers (Argentina, Brazil, and Chile) to arbitrate the 
dispute. A peaceful settlement was worked out. Huerta 
fled from Mexico, and Venustiano Carranza, the leader 
of the anti-Huerta rebels, became acting president. 
Francisco "Pancho" Villa, one of Carranza's chief 
generals, then quarreled with his leader and led a 
revolution against him. Carranza's soldiers drove Villa 
into northern Mexico, where he began raiding Ameri- 
can settlements across the Rio Grande, Many Ameri- 
cans called for war, but Wilson would not yield to their 

VICE-PRESIDENT AND CABINET 

Vice-President *Thomas R. Marshall 

Secretary of State * William Jennings Bryan 

*Robert Lansing (1915) 

Boinbridge Colby (1920) 
Secretary of the Treasury .... * William Gibbs McAdoo 

*Carter Glass (1918) 

David F. Houston (1920) 

Secretary of War Lindley M. Garrison 

*Nev/ton D. Baker (1916) 
Attorney General James C. McReynolds 

Thomas W. Gregory (1914) 

A. Mitchell Palmer (1919) 

Postmaster General Albert S. Burleson 

Secretary of the Navy *Josephus Daniels 

Secretary of the Interior Franklin K. Lane 

John B. Payne (1920) 
Secretary of Agriculture David F. Houston 

Edwin T. Meredith (1920) 
Secretary of Commerce William C. Redfield 

Joshua W. Alexander (1919) 
Secretary of Labor 'William B. Wilson 

»Has a separate biography in WORLD BOOK. 





V 

Wide World 



pressure. "Watchful waiting" became his policy. He 
sent troops under General John J. Pershing to patrol 
the border. Then, in 1916, he ordered Pershing to 
pursue Villa deep into Me.xico. Carranza warned that 
he would resist any further invasion. Fighting did occur, 
and only a series of dramatic events in the late spring 
of 1916 averted open war. In 1917, Wilson officially 
recognized the Mexican government that had been 
established by a new constitution. But relations were 
never cordial with Mexico during the rest of the Wilson 
era. .See Mexico (The Revolution of 1910; A New 
Constitution). 

Caribbean Problems. Both Wilson and Secretary of 
State William Jennings Biyan spoke out against taking 
more land for the United States by the use of force. But 
their policies toward many small nations of Latin 
America and the Caribbean area did not differ much 
from those of previous Presidents. In 1914, Wilson and 

HIGHLIGHTS OF WILSON'S ADMINISTRATION 



1913 Wilson signed a bill creating an independent Department 
of Labor. 

1913 Amendment 1 7 to ttie Constitution, providing for the elec- 
tion of U.S. Senators by popular vote instead of by state 
legislatures, became law. 

1913 Congress passed ttie Underwood Tariff Act and estab- 
lished the Federal Reserve System. 

1914 Congress passed the Clayton Antitrust Act and created 
the Federal Trade Commission. 

1914 Wilson emphasized U.S. neutrality, following the outbreak 

of World War I in Europe. 
1917 Congress approved the purchase of the Virgin Islands 

from Denmark. 

1917 (April 6) Congress declared war against Germany. 

1918 (Jan. 8) Wilson set forth the Fourteen Points. 

1918 (Oct. 6 — Nov. II) Wilson negotiated the armistice with 
Germany. 

1919 (Jan. 18— June 28) Wilson helped draft the Versailles 
Treaty at the Paris Peoce Conference. 

1919 Amendment 18 to the Constitution, banning the manufac- 
ture, sale, and transportation of alcoholic beverages, 
became law. 

1919 Congress rejected the Versailles Treaty and American 
membership in the League of Nations. 

1920 Amendment 19 to the Constitution, giving women the right 
to vote, became law. 



Wilson's Second Wife was Mrs. 
Edith Gait, widow of a Washington, 
D.C., jeweler. They hod no children. 



Wilson's Campaign to gain support 
for the League of Nations ended in his 
collapse. He suffered a stroke and 
was on invalid for the rest of his life. 



Br^'an took over most of the control of revolution-torn 
Nicaragua. They sent troops in 1915 to occupy Haiti. 
A year later, the Dominican Republic was placed 
under American military government. 

World War I Begins. In August, 1914, the outbreak 
of World War I stunned people eveiywhere. Most 
Americans joined in a single cry: '"Let's stay out of it." 
Wilson proclaimed the neutrality of the Laiited States. 
He said the nation "must be neutral in fact as well as in 
name . . . we must be impartial in thought as well as 
in action." 

But neutrality became easier to think about than to 
maintain. On May 7, 1915, a German submarine tor- 
pedoed and sank the British passenger liner Liisitania, 
killing 128 Americans. This incident enraged some 
Americans, but Wilson remained calm. He began 
negotiations with the Germans and got them to order 
their submarines not to attack neutral or passenger 
ships. .-\ngr\' men and women called Wilson "a human 
icicle" who did nothing to revenge the loss of American 
liv-es. But most Americans approved the President's 
fight for peace and neutrality. 

Life in the White House. With the help of her three 
daughters, Mrs. Wilson put her greatest efforts into 
making the White House as much like a private home 
as possible. .She had little interest in entertaining, and 
often sat silently through dinner parties. She devoted 
herself to welfare work and to small groups interested 
in literature and art. 

Then family life in the White House changed 
radically. Within an eight-month period, from Novem- 
ber, 1913, to July, 1914, two of the President's daugh- 
ters were married, and Mrs. Wilson became ill. After 
a short illness, the President's wife died on .'^ug. 6, 1914. 
Wilson was so saddened by her death that he nearh- 
lost his will to live. His nature seemed to demand 
feminine companionship. Wilson's unmarried daugh- 
ter, Margaret, became hostess for her father. 

Remarriage. In March, 1915, Wilson met Mrs. Edith 
Bulling Gait (Oct. 15, 1872-Dec. 28, 1961), widow of a 
Washington jeweler. He fell in love with the charming 
Mrs. Gait almost at once, and sent her flowers every 



272 



da\-. They were married in Mrs. Gait's home in Wash- 
ington on Dec. 18, 1915. 

The second Mrs. Wilson was an intelligent and 
strong-minded woman. Wilson again found the hap- 
piness and security he had known with his first wife. 

Election of 1916. In June, 1916, the Democrats re- 
nominated Wilson and Marshall. The Republicans had 
healed the split in their party, and chose a ticket of 
Supreme Court Justice Charles Evans Hughes and 
former Vice-President Charles W. Fairbanks. The war 
in Europe overshadowed all other issues in the cam- 
paign. Democrats sought votes for Wilson with the 
slogan, "He kept us out of war." But Wilson refused 
to use neutrality as a campaign promise. He knew the 
United States could be forced into war at any time 
Germany returned to unrestricted submarine warfare. 

On election night, the outcome was confused be- 
cause of delays in receiving the election retinns. Wilson 
went to bed believing Hughes had won. Many news- 
papers carried stories of Wilson's "defeat." But the 
final count in California gave the state to Wilson by 
4,000 votes. This insured his re-election. 

Wilson's Second Administration (1917-1921) 

Declaration of War. In Februaiy, 1917, before Wil- 
son's second inauguration, the Germans resumed un- 
restricted submarine warfare against all merchant 
shipping, including American ships. The President im- 
mediately broke off diplomatic relations with Ger- 
many. Later that month, British agents uncovered a 
German plot to start a ^var between Mexico and the 
United States. In March, German submarines sank 
five American merchant ships. Enraged Americans 
demanded war. 

Wilson decided the United States could no longer 
remain neutral. On the evening of April 2, the President 
drove to the Capitol with an escort of cavaliy. As he 
stepped before a joint session of Congress, his face was 
tense and white. He spoke in a voice heavy with feel- 
ing. He said actions by Germany were "in fact nothing 
less than war against the government and people of 
the United States." Thimderous applause greeted the 
President's words. He asked Congress to declare war 
against Germany, declaring that "the world must be 
made safe for democracy." 

Four days later, on April 6, 1917. Congress passed a 
joint resolution declaring war on Germany. For a com- 
plete discussion of the United States in the war, see 
World W.-\r I (The Fourth Year; The Final Year). 

War Leader. The President proved himself as great 
a leader in war as he had been in peace. His many 
speeches in support of the American and Allied cause 
stirred free men everywhere. Wilson stated the great 
issues of the war, and defined the aims for which the 

WILSON'S SECOND ELECTION 

Place of Nominating Convention. . .St. Louis 

Ballot on Which Nominated 1st 

Republican Opponent Charles Evans Hughes 

Electoral Vote 277 (Wilson) to 254 

(Hughes) 

Popular Vote 9,129,606 (Wilson) to 

8,538,221 (Hughes) 

Age at Second Inauguration 60 



WILSON, WOODROW 

democracies fought. He also pointed out the necessity 
of making a better world after the war. The American 
people rallied with great loyalty and patriotism. A cru- 
sading spirit, almost hysterical in its intensity, swept the 
nation. People sang "I'm a Yankee Doodle Dandy,'' 
"Over There," and other popular war songs. Well- 
known film stars, such as Nlary Pickford, Douglas 
Fairbanks, and Charlie Chaplin, drew huge crowds to 
purchase Liberty bonds at rallies. 

The Fourteen Points. Wilson delivered his most im- 
portant speech on Jan. 8, 1918. In this address to 
Congress, he named Fourteen Points to be used as a 
guide for a peace settlement. Five points established 
general ideals. Eight points dealt with immediate 
political and territorial problems. The fourteenth point 
called for setting up an association of nations to help 
keep world peace. 

The Fourteen Points are summarized below. 

1. Open covenants of peace openly arrived at, with 
no secret international agreements in the future. 

2. Freedom of the seas outside territorial waters in 
peace and in war, except in case of international action 
to enforce international treaties. 

3. Removal of all possible economic barriers and estab- 
lishment of equal trade conditions among nations. 

4. Reduction of national armaments to the lowest 
point consistent with domestic safety. 

5. Free, open-minded, and absolutely impartial ad- 
justment of all colonial claims. 

6. Evacuation of German troops from all Russian ter- 
ritory, an opportunity for Russia independently to 
determine its own political development and national 
policy, and a welcome for Russia into the society of free 
nations. 

7. Evacuation of German troops from Belgium and the 
rebuilding of that nation. 

8. Evacuation of German troops froin all French terri- 
tory and the return of Alsace-Lorraine to France. 

9. Readjustment of Italian frontiers along the clearly 
recognizable lines of nationality. 

10. Limited self-government for the peoples of Austria- 
Hungary. 

11. Evacuation of German troops from Romania, 
Serbia, and Montenegro, and independence guaranteed 
for the Balkan countries. 

12. Independence for Turkey, but an opportunity to 
de\'elop self-go\'ernment for other nationalities under 
Turkish rule, and guarantees that the Dardanelles be 
permanently opened as a free passage to ships of all 
nations. 

13. Independence for Poland. 

14. "A general association of nations must be formed 
under specific covenants for the purpose of affording 
mutual guarantees of political independence and terri- 
torial integrity to great and small states alike." 

Wilson's speech did much to undermine German 
morale during the final months of the war. It also gave 
the Germans a basis upon which to appeal for peace. 
On Nov. 9, 1918, only 11 months after the President 
had stated his Fourteen Points, Kaiser Wilhelm II gave 
up control of the German government. Two days later, 
an armistice negotiated by Wilson was proclaimed. 

The Peace Settlement. After the armistice had been 
signed. Wilson decided to lead the Lfnited States 
delegation to the peace conference at Paris. He wanted 
to make certain that his Fourteen Points would be car- 
ried out. The President also thought the L'nited .States 
should be represented by its political leader, as were 



273 



Great Britain, France, and the other powers. Wilson 
appointed a peace delegation that did not include a 
representative of either the Republican party or of the 
U.S. Senate. He was criticized for this, and later it 
helped cause Senate disapproval of the treaty agreed 
upon at Paris. 

Wilson knew the United States would be the only 
country represented at the peace table that wanted 
nothing for itself. He also believed he would be the 
only representative of the great powers who really cared 
about establishing an association of nations to prevent 
war. The President was determined to use his power 
and prestige to have the final peace settlement include 
a plan for a League of Nations. 

Wilson was the first President to cross the Atlantic 
Ocean while in office. He landed at Brest, France, on 
Dec. 13, 1918, and the next morning rode through the 
streets of Paris. Never had the people of Paris given a 
king or emperor such a joyous reception. Banners 
welcomed "Wilson le Juste." From France, Wilson 
went to England where he stayed at Buckingham 
Palace. In Rome, he had an audience with Pope 
Benedict XV, and became the first President to talk 
with a pope while in office. Everywhere he went in 
Europe, great crowds cheered him as the hope of 
humanity. 

At the Paris Peace Conference, held from Januan,' to 
June, Wilson obtained only part of the treaty provisions 
he wanted. In order to win support for tlie League and 
other provisions in the Fourteen Points, he compro- 
mised on several major issues. Wilson's concessions 
weakened his moral position in the eyes of the world, 
although they insured establishment of the League of 
Nations. See World War I (Peace Aims; The Peace 
Treaties); LEACiUE of Nations; Versailles, Treat\' of. 

Opposition to the League. In February, 1919, Wil- 
son returned to the United .States briefly to discuss the 
League and the peace treaty with the .Senate. The 
Constitution required two-thirds approval by the Sen- 
ate for the LInited .States to adopt the treaty which 
included the League. The President also hoped to quiet 
rising criticism throughout the countty. Wilson's 
position was no longer strong politically. He had asked 
for the election of Democrats to Congress in 1918 as an 
indication of personal trust. But the voters had chosen 
more Republicans than Democrats. 

Wilson soon discovered that he could not win Senate 
ratification of the League without some amendments 
protecting the interests of the LInited States. He went 
back to Paris in March, 1919, and the conference 
delegates accepted several of these provisions. Wilson 
returned to the L'nited States early in July with the 
text of the treaty. He found public debate on the peace 
terms in full swing, with mounting congressional 
opposition to the treaty and the League of Nations. 

American opinion on the treaty was split into three 
groups. The isolationists, led by Senators William E. 
Borah, Hiram W. Johnson, and James A. Reed, stood 
firmly against any League. They argued that the 
United States should not interfere in "European 
afTairs." The second group consisted of Wilson and his 
followers, who urged that the treaty be ratified with no 
important changes or compromises. The men in the 
largest group, led by Senator Heniy Cabot Lodge, took 
a middle ground between Wilson and the isolationists. 

274 



THE WORLD OF 




WORLD EVENTS 

1914 World War I began in Europe. 

1915 A German submarine sank the Lusitania, 

1918 Wilson proposed his Fourteen Points. 

1919 The Allies and Germany signed the Treaty of 
Versailles which ended World War I. 

1920 The League of Nations was established. 




The United States Flag 
hod 48 stars throughout 
Wilson's term of office. 



U.S. population was 108,600,000 in 1921, 
when Wilson retired from the presidency. 
There ware 48 states in the Union. 



They were ready to ratify the treaty with important 
changes. Some of these men, including Lodge, demand- 
ed changes that would reduce America's obligations 
to the League. 

Wilson's Collapse. The President decided to take 
his case for the League to the American people — the 
method that liad worked successfully for him in the 
past. On September 4, Wilson began a speaking tour 
through the Midwest and the Far West. His doctors 
had advised him against the trip, because his strenuous 
labors over the past several years had weakened his 
health. On .September 25, Wilson spoke at Pueblo, 
Colo., urging approval of the League. That night, as 
his train sped toward Wichita, Kans., Wilson collapsed 
from fatigue and nei-vous tension. He canceled the 
remainder of his tour and returned to Washington. On 
October 3, the President suffered a paralytic stroke. 

Wilson was an invalid for the rest of his life, but he 
did not give up the presidency. The Constitution does 
not prescribe who inherits the executive power when a 
President becomes severely ill but does not die or resign. 
After October, Wilson left his bed only for simple rec- 
reation or for purely formal tasks. These greatly taxed 
his strength, and his wife guided his hand when he 
signed official documents. Wilson did not call a meet- 
ing of the Cabinet until .-Xpril 13, 1920. Before that, the 
Cabinet met unofficially and carried on much of the 



PRESIDENT WILSON 




The Panama Canal officially 
opened to world trode on July 
12, 1920. Work on the 50.72- 
mile-long canal began in 1906. 



World War I began in 1914. The four-yeor 
conflict between the Allies and Central Powers 
cost more than 37,000,000 military casualties. 
The United Stotes entered the war in 1 9 





First Airmail Route was established 
in 1918 between New York City, 
Philadelphia, and Washington, D.C. 
In 1919, two British fliers made the 
first nonstop transatlantic flight. 



Federal Reserve System, creat- 
ed in 1913, set up a central bank- 
ing system for the United States. 



The Virgin Islands were pur- 
chased by the United States from 
Denmark in 1917 for $25,000,000. 





The First Commercial Radio 

broadcasts were made from 
Detroit and Pittsburgh in 1920. 



The First Telephone Line link- 
ing New York City and Son Fran- 
cisco began operating in 1915. 



Three Amendments to the United States 
Constitution were adopted. They dealt with 
woman suffrage, the sale of alcoholic bever- 
ages, and the direct election of U.S. Senators. 




WILSON, WOODROW 

work of e;oveinment during Wilson's long illness. 

From his sickbed, the President helplessly watched 
the losing fight for his treaty. Senator Lodge, chair- 
man of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, pre- 
sented the treaty for vote in November, 1919. He and 
his committee had added 14 reservations. The most 
important one declared that the United States assumed 
no obligation to support the League of Nations unless 
Congress specifically approved by joint resolution. 
Claiming that this reservation would destroy the 
League, Wilson instructed Senate Democrats to vote 
against approval of the treaty containing the Lodge 
resewations. As a result, the treaty failed to win two- 
thirds approval. The treaty came up for vote again in 
March, 1920, but once inore it failed to win the 
necessaiy votes. 

Wilson insisted that the treaty and the League 
should be the chief issue of the 1920 presidential cam- 
paign. The Democratic platform endorsed the League, 
and the Republican platform opposed it. In the elec- 
tion, Warren G. Harding, the Republican nominee, 
overwhelmingly defeated James M. Co.\, his Demo- 
cratic opponent. As far as the United States was con- 
cerned, the League of Nations was dead. 

A month later, on Dec. 10, 1920, Wilson won the 
Nobel prize for peace for his work in founding the 
League of Nations and seeking a fair peace agreement. 

Last Years 

For almost three years after his term ended in March, 
1921, Wilson lived in quiet retirement in \Vashington. 
He formed a law partnership with Bainbridge Colby, 
his third Secretaiy of State. Although Wilson had re- 
gained partial use of his arms and legs, his physical 
condition did not permit any actual work. He saw an 
occasional motion picture or play, listened to books and 
magazines read aloud to him, and sometimes invited 
friends for lunch. 

Wilson was confident that future events would prove 
him correct regarding the League and the peace terms. 
In his last public speech, to a group of friends outside 
his home on Armistice Day, 1923, Wilson declared: 
"I cannot refrain from saying it: I am not one of those 
who have the least anxiety about the triumph of the 
principles I have stood for. I have seen fools resist 
Providence before and I have seen their destruction, 
as will come upon these again — utter destruction and 
contempt. That we shall prevail is as sure as that God 
reigns." 

Wilson continued to bear the crushing blows of 
defeat with dignity and calm. But he told his friends he 
was "tired of swimming upstream." On Feb. 3, 1924, 
he died in his sleep. Two days later, Wilson was buried 
in the National Cathedral. He is the only President 
interred in Washington, D.C. Arthur s. Li\k 

Related Articles in World Book include: 

Bryan, Williaui Nobel Prizes (picture) 

Jennings President of the United States 

Dollar (picture) Roosevelt, Theodore 
Fourteen Points (Later Years) 

House, Edward Mandcll Versailles, Treaty of 

League of Nations World War I (The Fourth 
Marshall, Thomas Riley Year; The Final Year) 

276 



B. Education 

C. Wilson's Family 

D. Teacher 



Outline 
I. Early Years 

A. Childhood 
II. Beginning Career 

A. Lawyer 

B. Graduate Student 

III. University President 

IV. Governor of New Jersey 

A. Political Reformer B. Presidential Candidate 
V. Wilson's First Administration (1913-1917) 

A. Inauguration F. World War I Begins 

B. Legislative Program G. Life in the White House 

C. Foreign Affairs H. Remarriage 

D. Crisis in Mexico I. Election of 1916 

E. Caribbean Problems 

VI. Wilson's Second Administration (1917-1921) 

A. Declaration I). Ihe Peace Settlement 

of War E. Opposition to the 

B. War Leader League 

C. The Fourteen Points F. Wilson's Collapse 
VII. Last Years 

Questions 

Why was Wilson's election to the presidency in 1912 
almost certain following his nomination? 

What were Wilson's main educational reforms at 
Princeton University? 

Wirat brought Wilson to national attention as a 
presidential prospect? 

What were the most important achievements in domes- 
tic affairs during his first administration? 

What was one of Wilson's most valuable techniques 
for winning legislation that he wanted? 

Why was Wilson's family life so important to him? 

Why did Wilson personally attend the Paris Peace 
Conference in 1919? 

Why do historians regard Wilson as one of the nation's 
greatest Presidents? 

What were his three main careers? 

In what connection did Wilson make the statement: 
"Let the people come forward"? 

Bool&lt;s to Read 

Hatch, Alden. Woodroiv Wilson. Holt, 1947. 

Hoover, Herbert. The Ordeal of Woodrow Wilson. 
McGraw, 1958. 

Link, Arthur S. Woodrow Wilson and the Progressive Era^ 
1910-1917. Harper, 1954. Wilson, Vol. I, The Road to 
the White House. Princeton, 1947. Vol. II, The New 
Freedom, 1956. Vol. Ill, The Struggle for Neutrality, 
1914-1915. 1960. 

Steinberg, Alfred. Woodrow Wilson. Putnam, 1961. 

Walworth, Arthur. Woodrow Wilson. Vol. I, American 
Prophet. Vol. II, World Prophet. McKay, 1958. 

WILSON CLOUD CHAMBER is a device that enables 
scientists to see the tracks left by subatomic particles. 
Charles T. R. Wilson, of Cambridge University in Eng- 
land, invented the instrument. Wilson noted that vapor 
condenses on tiny bits of dust to form raindrops. He 
wondered if it would condense on anything as small as 
a subatomic particle. He perfected the cloud chamber 
about 1912. 

A typical cloud chamber consists of a glass flask with 
a rubber bulb attached to one end. The bulb and about 
two-thirds of the flask are filled with water. At least 
100 volts of electricity are usually maintained across 
the air trapped above the water. A radioactive material, 
such as radium, is placed at one side of this air space, 
and provides the source of the subatomic particles. As 
these particles pass through the air space, they produce 
ions by knocking electrons oflsome of the gas molecules 
in the air (see Ionization). 

As the water in the flask evaporates, the air space be- 



comes saturated with water vapor. When the air and 
water vapor cool, some of the vapor condenses on the 
ions to form droplets of water. These droplets show the 
path taken by the subatomic particles. The cooling is 
accomplished by slowly compressing the rubber bulb 
and releasing it immediately. 

Subatomic particles can be identified by the type of 
path or track that they leave. Alpha particles, which are 
helium nuclei, make straight, dense tracks that can 
easily be traced. Btia particles, which are electrons, are 
much lighter. When beta particles collide with other 
particles, they deflect and leave irregular tracks that 
are difficult to trace. See Alpha Ray; Beta Ray. 

The photographs taken in cloud-chamber studies 
show clearly how various atoms break up, and how fast 
their particles lose energy. They also show what combi- 
nations take place when particles collide. 

In the 1950's, Donald A. Glaser, an American physi- 
cist, developed the bubble chamber. It is a container of 
superheated pentane, kept under high pressure to delay 
boiling. Photographs of the bubbles give information 

on nuclear collisions. Palmer H. Crato 

See also Atom; Ionization; RADiOACTi\aT^- (Kinds 
of Radiation); Wilson, Charles T. R. 

WILSON COLLEGE. See UNrvERSiTiES and Colleges 
(table). 

WILSON DAM. See Tennessee Valley Authority 
(The T\'A at Work). 

WILT, in plants, is a condition in which the leaves and 
stems droop and die. It is usually a symptom of plant 
diseases which cause the cells to collapse. A plant wilts 
if it needs water. Disease bacteria that cause wilting 
stop up the channels that carry water in the plant. Many 
fungi that attack plants may cause wilting, sometimes 
by secreting poisons into the plant tissues. 

Man)' root diseases bring about wilting. Fiisarium is a 
fungus that wilts asters, potatoes, tomatoes, cotton, flax, 
and other plants. Sclerotinia, another fungus, \vilts many 
garden vegetables. Dutch elm disease, or Graphium wilt, 
is a disease that kills many elm trees every year. 

Control of wilt depends on the disease that causes it. 
Generally, one should destroy the diseased plants, and 
disinfect the soil. Some of the newer varieties of plants 
produced by scientists resist wilt. William f. hanna 

Wilt Caused by a Fungus has attacked the cucumber plant at 
the right. At the left is a normal, healthy cucumber vine. 

USDA 





WINCHESTER COLLEGE 

WILTON. See Rugs and Carpets (Kinds of Modern 
Rugs). 

WILTSHIRE. See England (color map, The 39 His- 
toric Counties of England). 

WIMPLE. See Clothing (The Middle Ages). 

WINANT, JOHN GILBERT (1889-1947), was United 
States Ambassador to Great Britain from 1941 to 1946. 
Winant served as a Republican in the New Hampshire 
house of representatives from 1917 to 1921, and again 
from 1923 to 1925. He served as a state senator from 
1921 to 1923, and as governor from 1925 to 1927, and 
1 93 1 to 1 935. Winant supported social security, the abo- 
lition of child labor, old-age instirance, and a shorter 
work week. In 1935, he became the first chairman of 
the Social Security Board. He was named director of 
the International Labor Office in 1939. Winant was 
born in New York City. 

WINCH is a crank used to give rotary motion to a 
machine. It is also the name of a device with a crank 
attached to a druin around which rope is wound. The 
rope is attached to a heavy object. By turning the crank, 
a person can winch (move) the object to a desired 
position or height. See also Derricks and Cranes. 

WINCHELL, WALTER (1897- ), is an American 
newspaperman and commentator. He became im- 
portant in making the gossip column a regular news- 
paper feature. Critics accused him of unethical snoop- 
ing, but his column became widely read and imitated. 
In his column, Winchell used a type of jargon that has 
been widely copied. He coined colorful words and 
phrases, such as "lohengrined" and "middle-aisled" for 
"married." 

\Vinchell was born in New York City and attended 
public schools. He played in vaudeville before begin- 
ning to write for The Vaudeville News in 1920. He be- 
came nationally known in 1929 through his syndicated 
column for the New York Daily Mirror. He also appeared 
on radio and television. Paul Molloy 

WINCHESTER, a rifle. See Rifle. 

WINCHESTER (pop. 29,500; alt. 210 ft.) was the chief 
town of England in Anglo-Saxon times. It is a religious 
and educational center. Winchester lies on the River 
Itchen in southern England (see England [map]). 

Both Alfred the Great and the Danish King Canute 
were buried at Winchester. After the Normans con- 
quered England in 1 066, Winchester continued to rival 
London as a trade and political center. William of 
W\'kehatTi completed the famous 556-foot-long cathe- 
dral in the 13O0's. This is the longest church in England. 
William also founded Winchester College, one of the 
leading English public schools. Francis h. Herrick 

WINCHESTER COLLEGE at Winchester, England, is 
one of the oldest and most prominent public schools in 
the countiy. William of Wykeham, Bishop of Win- 
chester, founded it in 1382, and it was opened in 1394. 
The motto of the school is "Manners Makyth Man." 
The college was originally established for 70 poor 
scholars, but greater numbers were gradually admitted. 
It flourished until the 1700's, when a decline began. 
William Stanley Goddard, who became headmaster in 
1 796, saved the school by his reforms. Winchester Col- 
lege was one of the first public schools to introduce 
courses in science and mathematics. r. w. morris 



277 



WIND 

WIND. When the air moves, it becomes wind. Winds 
blow in a small way in some family kitchens e\ery day. 
If there is a fire in the stove, all the air directly above is 
heated. This causes the molecules of the warm air to 
expand and take up more space. The heated air be- 
comes lighter than the surrounding air. So it rises 
toward the ceiling. On all sides, cooler air presses in to 
fill the space above the stove, boosting the warm air on 
its way upward. Now, the cooler air becomes heated 
and joins the column of air moving upward. As the 
lieated air reaches the ceiling, it spreads out, cools, and 
comes down again, helped on its downward course Ijy 
the warm current that rises from the stove. Thus a cir- 
culation is established. 

Causes of Wind. The circulation of warm and cold 
air that the kitchen stove sets up on a small scale is 
taking place continuously all o\'er the earth on a large 
scale. We live at the bottom of a vast ocean of air whose 
ebb and flow are as ceaseless as the tides of the sea. The 
term wtnd is used in a general way to mean all these 
movements of the atmosphere. The example of the stove 
shows that difference in temperature of the air cause a 
difference in the weight, or pressure. It is the unequal 
temperature and pressure of the atmosphere over differ- 
ent parts of the earth that is the chief cause of wind. 

The cause of wind is readily understood by a study 
of the general circulation of the atmosphere of the earth. 
The region along the equator is the hottest part of the 
earth's surface. The air over this belt is warmer and 
lighter than that on either side, so it is forced upward 
by the higher pressure of the cooler air. Over the equa- 
torial regions, then, air moves constantly upward. This 
current is not felt as wind, and sailors called the region 
the belt of equatorial calms. As the warm air rises, other 
air flows in from both sides to replace it. These currents 
of cooler, heavier air would be due north-south winds 
if the eartli did not turn so fast from west to east. But 
the north-south air currents are constantly coming into 
contact with portions of the earth whose speed of rota- 
tion is greater than that of the region from which they 
come. Since the air is unable to get up such speed as 
rapidly as the solid earth, the currents lag behind. This 



causes them to turn a litde from their straight course. 
In tlie Northern Hemisphere they turn a little toward 
the right (or wesc^vard) and in the .Southern Hemisphere 
toward the left (also westward). This means that the 
winds blowing toward the equator to replace the rising 
air arc from the northeast in the Northern Hemisphere 
and from the southeast in the Southern Hemisphere. 
These winds are the well-known trade winds. 

The upward current of air over the equator finally 
reaches a height where the surrounding atmosphere has 
the same weight and temperature as the upward cur- 
rent. Now it spreads out and flows toward the poles. 
The coldness of die poles constandy cools the air above, 
causing it to become heavier and sink toward the sur- 
face of the earth, where it begins to flow toward the 
equator. To replace the air which is sinking earthward 
at the poles, new air must flow in abo\e from regions 
nearer the equator. The currents flowing toward the 
equator at the surface now become northeast winds in 
the Northern Hemisphere and southeast winds in the 
Southern Hemisphere. See Weather (Weather Patterns). 

The down currents of heavy, cold air near the poles 
cause a polar anticyclone, or high-pressure cell. As winds 
blow outward from the center of this high-pressure sec- 
tion, they are turned from a straight course to form 
northeast winds in the Northern Hemisphere and south- 
east winds in the Southern Hemisphere. These winds 
bring cold polar air down into the parts of the world 
midway between the poles and the ecjuator. This cold 
air meets warm, moist air that is brought up from the 
tropics by the winds that blow around the high pres- 
sure bands midway between the poles and the equator. 
Now we have directly opposite air masses in contact 
with each other. On one side, there are relatively warm, 
light, and moist tropical air masses. On the other are 
cold, heavy polar air masses. The line between polar 
and tropical air is known to meteorologists as the polar 
front. It is along this front that the wandering cyclones 
and anticyclones of the Temperate Zones originate. 
These winds bring the variable weather of winter. 

Kinds of Wind. The speed at which the air current 
moves, and the direction from which it moves determine 
what it is named and determine whether it is harmful 
or beneficial. .\ wind of 19 to 24 miles an hour is classed 



WHY AND HOW MONSOONS BLOW' 



The warm earth heats the air 
obove ft. Warm air rises 



SUMMER 



WET MONSOON 



'^ 



Cool, moist air from the ocean moves 
in to take the place of hot oir 



Land warmer 



Ocean cooler 



DRY MONSOON 



WINTER 




The land cools quickly, and 
chills the air above it 



land cooler 



The warmer" air above tl 
rises, and cool dry air sweeps 
out from lond to take its place 



Ocean wanner 



as ?i fresh breeze, and is not harmful. When it reaches a 
speed of 47 miles an hour, it is a strong gale, and may 
cause some damage to fruit crops. At 64 to 75 miles 
an hour, it is a windstorm and is dangerous both to 
crops and property. Abo\e 75 miles an hour, when 
it is classed as a hurricane, wind is de\-astating in its 
damage to crops, property, and man himself. 

The most dangerous of all winds is the tornado, a 
sw irling mo\'ement of the wind in a counterclockwise 
direction, sometimes at more than 300 miles an hour. 
The speed of a tornado has ne\er been measured ac- 
curately, but the destmcdon is almost incredible. Tor- 
nadoes occur most often in die central Mississippi Val- 
ley region of the United .States. The bora, a cold, violent 
north to northeast wind, is another famous localized 
type of wind. It sweeps across the regions surround- 
ing the .\driatic .Sea. 

Beaufort's Wind Scale. In describing the force of wind, 
mariners use a scale drawn up in 1805 by Rear Admiral 
Sir Francis Beaufort, a famous British hydrographer. He 
developed a table of strength of winds based on the 
effect of wind on sailing ships, .^s steam was gradually 
subsdtuted for sails, Beaufort's scale was translated 
into terms more exacdy suited to steam. The following 
table gives numbers of the revised scale. Edna s. Stone 



WIND CAVE NATIONAL PARK 



Beaufort Scale 
Numbers 



Wind 
Designations 



Velocity in 
Miles Per Hour 



Calm 0-1 

1 Light air 1-3 

2 Slight breeze 4-7 

3 Gentle breeze 8-12 

4 Moderate breeze 13-18 

5 Fresh breeze 1 9-24 

6 Strong breeze 25-3 1 

7 Moderate gale 32-38 

8 Fresh gale 39-46 

■5 Strong gale 47-54 

10 Whole gale 55-63 

11 Storm 64-75 

'- Hurricane Above 75 



Related Articles in World Book include: 
Air Chinook 

Anemometer Climate 

Calms, Regions of Cloud 



Cyclone 

Desert 

Dune 



Erosion 

Foehn 

Gale 

Harmattan 

Hurricane 

Jet .Stream 

Khamsin 

Land and Sea Breezes 



Mistral Squall 

Monsoon .Storm 

Norther Tornado 
Prevailing Westerly Trade Wind 

Simoom Weather 

Sirocco Whirlwind 

Soil Zephyr 



WIND CAVE NATIONAL PARK is a park in the 
rolling hills of southwestern South Dakota which sur- 
rounds one of the most unusual caves in the United 
States. The strong currents of wind that blow alter- 
nately in and out of the mouth of the cave suggested 
its name. In the cave, the wind is quiet, and the tem- 
perature remains a cool 47°F. 

Wind Cave was formed by ages of erosion, when 
water constandy wore away the limestone layers through 
which the cave winds. 

The cave has few of the stalagmites and stalactites 
for which the Carlsbad Caverns and Mammoth Cave 
are famous. Instead, it has a series of strange boxwork 
and frostwork formations which are not found else- 
where in the United States. The boxwork formations 
are calcite crystal stnictures, which vary from bright 
yellow through pink and rich browns to deep blue. The 
frostwork is made up of many tiny white crystals along 
the ceilings and walls. Under the electric lights which 
illuminate the entire cave, the boxwork becomes a 
magical land of soft glowing color, and the frostwork 
gleams like millions of bright jewels. 

Tom Bingham, a Black Hills pioneer, is credited with 
discovering the cave in 1881. While deer hunting, he 
heard a strange whistling sound which came from a 
clump of brush. He searched and found an opening in 
the rock, about 10 inches in diameter, from which a 
strong draft came. This natural opening is a few steps 
in back of the present man-made entrance. 

The land around Wind Cave was made a national 
park in 1903. The park, about 10 miles north of Hot 
Springs, S.Dak., contains 28.059.26 acres. The sur- 
face area of the park has been set aside as a wildlife 
presei-ve for buffalo, deer, antelope, prairie dogs, and 
other animals. james j. Cullinane 




279 



WIND EROSION 

WIND EROSION. See Dust Storm; Erosion. 

WIND GAP. See Gap. 

WIND INSTRUMENT. .See Music (Musical Instru- 
ments); Sound (Musical .Sounds). 

WIND RIVER RANGE. .See Wyoming (Land Regions). 

WIND TUNNEL is used to test the action of air against 
an airplane, an automobile, a jet engine, a guided mis- 
sile, or some other object. Wind is blown through the 
tunnel at different speeds. Air pressure and air tempera- 
ture also can be controlled. .Scale models of airplane 
and engine parts, accurate to a thousandth of an inch, 
are tested before production begins. 

Wind tunnels are built in many shapes and for differ- 
ent purposes. Soine are big enough to test full-sized 
experimental airplanes. Others can test only small 
models. Tunnels in which the speed of the wind is less 
than the speed of sound are called subsonic tunnels. 
Those with speeds faster than sound are supersonic. Tun- 
nels that use air speeds five or more times faster than 
sound are called hypersonic. In some tunnels, tempera- 
ture can be made very low, in order to represent condi- 
tions at high altitudes. These tunnels are used to 
investigate icing on aircraft. In others, temperature is 
made very high to represent conditions met by a guided 
missile in its flight through the earth's atmosphere. The 
stability and control of airplanes are tested in free-flight 
tunnels. In these, an operator outside the tunnel con- 
trols the plane as it flies freely inside. There also are spin 
tunnels to test the tail spinning of aircraft. Gust tunnels 
test the action of gusts of wind on airplanes. Large elec- 
tric fans make the wind in most subsonic tunnels. Air 
compressors, like those used in paint sprayers, inake the 
wind in supersonic tunnels. 

Supports that extend into the test section of the tun- 
nel hold the model. The supports are fastened to bal- 
ances, which are outside the test section. These balances 
record the action of the wind on the model. Insti\iinenls 
measure pressures at many places on the model. In 

A Manned Satellite Model Takes a Wind-Tunnel Test at 

the U.S. government's tangley Research Center in Hampton, Va. 

wide World 




supersonic tunnels, special optical instnaments are used 
to see the changes in density of air as it flows around 
the model. h. s. Stillwell 

See also Aerodynamics; Airplane (Design and Test- 
ing); Wright Brothers. 

WIND VANE. See Weather Vane. 

WINDERMERE LAKE, tl'M' ^r/wfr, is the largest lake 
in England. This beautiful body of water lies in the 
county of Westmoreland, in northwestern England. It 
forms part of the famous English Lake District. The 
scenery which surrounds Windermere Lake greatly in- 
spired the English poets William Wordsworth, Robert 
Southey, and Samuel Coleridge. Wooded hills rise as 
high as 1 ,000 feet around the lake, and blend with the 
distant mountains to the north and west. The small 
islands in the center of the lake form a picturesque 
group. Windermere Lake covers an area of 5.69 square 
miles, and is from 30 to more than 200 feet deep. Its 
greatest width is 1 mile, and it is about lOf miles long. 
The Leven River flows from Windermere Lake into 

Morecambe BaV. Francis H. Herrick 

WINDFLOWER. .See Anemone; Wood Anemone. 

WINDHOEK, VI.\r HOOK (pop. 36,0,50; alt. 5,543 
ft.), is the capital of South-West Africa, which is a terri- 
tory under the control of .South Africa. Windhoek lies on 
a plateau near the center of the country. For location, 
see South Africa (color map). The city is connected by 
railroad with Walvis Bay on the Atlantic Coast, and 
with cities in South Africa. Windhoek has a cool, dry, 
and pleasant climate. Hibberd v. b. Klwe, Jr. 

WINDHOVER. .See Kestrel. 

WINDLASS, U'I.\D his, is a siinple machine used to 
lift weights and pull loads. One of its most common uses 
was to hoist water from wells. The windlass is a form of 
the wheel and axle which raises a heavy load by the 
application of a small amount of force. The simple 
windlass consists of a cylinder which can be turned by a 
crank. \ rope or chain is wound aroimd this cylinder. A 
bucket is firmly fastened at the end of the rope or chain. 
Turning the crank winds the rope around the cylinder 
and the bucket can be lowered into the well and then 
raised again. The windlass may be operated by me- 
chanical power. The capstans used on docks and on 
shipboard are a form of windlass. So are the drums 
and cables of a crane or an elevator. j. L. Meriam 

See also Wheel and Axle. 

WINDMILL is a machine that is a member of the class 
known as prime movers. It uses the energy of the wind 
to produce power. 

Windmills are generally used to pump water and to 
drive electric generators for lighting and for charging 
storage batteries on farms. A mill used to pump water 
has a wheel of blades set at a common angle and 
mounted on a horizontal shaft. The wheel is held with 
its face toward the wind by a vane, or mddcr. The wind 
strikes the blades of the windmill at an angle and forces 
the wheel to revolve. The inill gets the full force of the 
wind by being mounted on a tower, 20 or more feet 
high, above surrounding obstmctions. 

Windmills no%v are usually built of steel. The old- 
fashioned, picturesque Dutch windmill with its four 
long arms carrying cloth sails is seldom seen on Ameri- 
can farms, and it is gradually disappearing from the 
countr)'side of The Netherlands. 

Within limits, the power of windmills increases with 



280 




Pump Rod 



Wind turns propeller wheel, 
small gears on shaft turn 
larger ones, Increasing power. 




Connecting rods from large 
gears move pump rod up and 
down as wind wheel revolves. 




Windmills Use the Power of the Wind to Pump Water. 

the diameter of the wheel. But there is a practical limit 
in diameter over which there is little gain in power on 
account of the increased weight. In tests, a steel wheel 
8 feet in diameter developed 0.53 horsepower in a 20- 
mile wind. One 10 feet in diameter produced 1 .06 horse- 
power in the same wind. 

Wind-electric plants have a propeller-type wheel, with 
two or three blades, which turns at a high speed. The 
\\heel is usually mounted on a mast held up by guy 
cables. The wheel is geared to a dynamo. The sizes of 
wind-electric plants range from those that develop 100 
watts to those that develop 2,000 watts. Roy bainer 

See also France (picture, Brittany); Kansas (color 
picture); Oklahoma (color picture); Ruisdael, Jacob 
VAN (picture); Turbine (Early Days). 

WINDMILL POINT. See South Carolina (Interesting 
Places to \'isit [Forts]). 

WINDOW was at first merely an opening to provide 
light and air in a building. Only erode shutters and 
lattices covered the first windows. Later, linen, oiled 
paper, and sometimes mica or g\psum were used for 
window-panes, in addition to wooden shutter's. Glass 
windows came into use in ancient Roman times. 

When the great Gothic cathedrals of Europe were 
built in the Middle Ages, beautiful colored glass was 
used in their famous windows. Their rose windows be- 
came famous. The windows were rich with tracer\-; and 
the glass, in small pieces, was set in lead strips (see 
Tracery). Such windows may be seen today in many 
cathedrals of France and England. Some of the best are 
in the Cathedral of Chartres. 

Small-paned glass windows began to be used in 
palaces in the 1 200's, and were common in large houses 
from the 1500's on. In England these windows were 
often very large. But in smaller houses and farmhouses 
glass windows were small and rare until the 1 700's. 

Architects now plan most buildings, whether they are 



WINDOW DISPLAY 

homes, oflfice buildings, or factories, so that windows 
will let in the most daylight possible. Sometimes they 
use walls made of glass blocks. Many new homes have 
extra-large /i/r/(ir&lt;' windows in one or more rooms. Jalousie 
windows, shaped and operated like Venetian blinds, be- 
came popular in the I950's. They have slats of clear or 
frosted glass that keep out rain without shutting off 
outside air. 

The disadvantage of having many large windows in 
a building is that they permit a great amount of heat to 
be lost during cold weather. But double-glazed glass 
panes which prevent this are common. Methods of 
opening and closing windows and of ventilating rooms 
are constantly being improved. The design and location 
of windows has also become very important. Windows 
are placed so they let in the sun in winter and prevent 
its entrance on hot summer days, as well as to give the 
most beautiful views. Most modern decorators avoid 
using heavy draperies and curtains. A feeling of much 
extra space can be given to a room by walls of clear glass 
opening on a view or garden. Talbot Hamlin 

See also Glass; Stained Glass; Venetian Blind. 

WINDOW BOX is actually a type of garden made of 
wood or metal. It is particularly popular in the city to 
add beauty to homes. It should be about 8 to 12 inches 
wide. If the box is wooden, both the inside and the out- 
side should be coated with zinc in order to keep the 
wood from decaying. Asphaltum paint will also preserve 
the wood and make the box waterproof. Holes should 
be drilled in the bottom for drainage. 

The location of the window bo.x is important, and 
depends upon the type of plants that are to be planted. 
Window boxes for flowering plants should be directly 
exposed to the sun. But plants which are grown for their 
leaves, such as ferns, should always be in the shade. 

Flowers such as the geranium, begonia, and petunia 
are popular window-box plants. Cactus plants and other 
succulents, or fleshy plants, can be grown in the window 
box. Palms and ferns are other popular plants in win- 
dow boxes. Sometimes several types of plants are grown 
in the same box. The center of the box is usually planted 
with upright plants, and the outside border with vines 

or drooping plants. Alfred C. Hottes 

WINDOW DISPLAY is the arrangement of goods in a 
store window in order to show customers some of the 
goods that are for sale in the store. Most stores do not 
have enough windows in which to display all the kinds 
of goods that are for sale. Therefore, only those goods 
that are pleasing in appearance, or that are good bar- 
gains, appear in window displays. 

The goods in the windows are changed often. This 
helps keep them from becoming soiled by dust and 
moisture. It also helps keep the window display interest- 
ing. Sometimes articles that are not sold in the store 
appear in the window displays to make them more 
attractive to the customers. 

The owner or one of his clerks prepares the window 
displays in small stores. Special employees prepare 
them in large stores. These employees spend a con- 
siderable amount of time planning how a display will 
look before showing it to the customers. The people 
who make up window displays are often trained 
artists. Fred m. jones 

281 



WINDPIPE 

WINDPIPE is the tube that carries air from the pharynx 
(an air passage from the nose and mouth) to the lungs. 
Scientists call it the trachea. In man, the windpipe is 
about 4w inches long and 1 inch in diameter. It is held 
open by a series of C-shaped pieces of cartilage. These 
cartilages form the hard ridges on the neck just below 
the "Adam's apple." 

The bump called the Adam's apple is the laiyn.x 
(voice box). It is at the top of the windpipe. Air passing 
over the vocal cords of the larynx causes the cords to 
vibrate and produce sounds. 

The lower end of the windpipe divides into two 
bronchi (tubes), which lead to the lungs. The right tube 
is straighter than the left one. Foreign objects that 
enter the windpipe usually lodge on the right side. 
The epiglottis, a leaf-shaped structure, normally forms 
a lid that prevents swallowed food from entering the 
windpipe. wh.liam v. maver 

Related Articles. .See the Trans-Vision three-dimen- 
sional color picture with Hum.an Body. Other related 
articles in World Book include: 

Adam's Apple Cilia Lung Throat 

Cartilage Larynx Pharynx 

WINDSOR, Wl.Xzer, is the name of the present royal 
family of Great Britain. In I960, Queen Elizabeth II 
announced that future generations, except for princes 
and princesses, will bear the surname Mountbatter}- 



Windsor in honor of her husband Philip Mountbatten. 
The name Ji'indsor, adopted in 1917, was taken from 
Windsor Castle, a royal residence. The new name was 
chosen to replace Saxe-Coburg-Gotha , abandoned during 
World War I because of its German origin. 

The first British king of the line preceding the 
Windsors was George I of Hanover. The family name of 
Hanover originated from the Electorate of Hanover, in 
Germany, which the British kings also ruled. The last 
Hanoverian king was Williain I\', X'ictoria's uncle. The 
laws of Hanover did not permit a woman mler, and 
when Victoria became Queen of Great Britain, the 
Electorate of Hanover passed from the British royal 
family to Ernest .'\ugustus, brother of \\'illiam I\'. 

Saxe-Coburg was a duchy in Saxony held by the 
VVettin famih'. One of the daughters of Duke Francis, 
ruler of the duchy, married the Duke of Kent, son of 
George III of England. She was Victoria's mother. 

In 1826 the .Saxon lands were redivided. Ernest, son 
of Duke Francis, exchanged Saalfeld for Gotha and 
founded the house of .Saxe-Coburg-Gotha. Ernest had 
two sons, Ernest II and Albert, who were first cousins of 
X'ictoria. Albert married \'ictoria in 1840. Victoria's 
children took their father's name, and Edward VII, her 
son, was the first English king to bear the name of Saxe- 
Coburg-Gotha. His son George \' was the first to use 
the name of Windsor. c. L. mow.^t 

See also Edward (\'II; \'III); Eliz.\beth II; 
George, of England; Victoria; Windsor Castle. 



Windsor Castle Covers About 24 Acres Near London. 



Burton Holmes, Ewing Galloway 




282 



WINDSOR, Ont. (pop. 114,367; met. area 193,365; 

alt. 580 ft.), is often called the Southern Gateway to 
Canada. It is the chief port of entry into Canada from 
the United States. Windsor lies on the southeast bank 
of the Detroit River directly opposite Detroit, Mich. 
For location, see Ontario (color map). Two tunnels and 
a suspension bridge connect the Canadian and Ameri- 
can cities. \Vindsor is one of Canada's most important 
industrial cities. It is also a major transportation 
center. 

Windsor is sometimes called the City that put Canada 
on 1 1 7(tv/j because its chief products, like those of Detroit, 
are automobiles and automobile parts. Other products 
include pharmaceuticals, chemicals, salt, and distillery 
and brewery goods. A rich agiiculmral district sur- 
rounds the cit\-. 

The French made the first settlement on tlie site of 
Windsor in the middle 1 700"s. English settlers came to 
die area during the 1 790's. The commimity was known 
variously as The Feny, Richmond, and .South Detroit. 
In 1836, it was renamed Windsor after an English town. 
Windsor was incorporated as a city in 1892. In 1935, 
it annexed the "border cities" of Sandwich, Walker- 
ville, and East Windsor (Ford City). The city has a 
council-manager form of government. D. m. l. f.\rr 

WINDSOR, DUCHESS OF. See Edward (VTII). 

WINDSOR, DUKE OF. See Edward (VIII). 

WINDSOR CASTLE is the chief residence of the rulei-s 
of Great Britain. It stands at Windsor, about 21 
miles west of London. William the Conqueror chose the 
site and built a casde there. Edward III tore this castle 
down and began the present structure. Later kings 
added to the castle until it now covere about 24 acres. 
Windsor Castle stands in the Little Park, which joins 
the Great Park soudi of Windsor. Queen X'ictoria and 
her husband are buried in the Little Park. 

The most important feature of the castle is the round 
keep (tower) which dates from the time of Edward III. 
It is 80 feet high, and can be seen from far away. Four 
other towers also rise from the walls. 

The section west of the central tower is called the 
Lower Ward. It contains Saint George's Chapel, begun 
by Edward I\' and finished by Heniy VIII. In the 
chapel vault lie the bodies of Henry \TII, Charles I, 
William I\', George V, George \'I, and other English 
rulers. The beautiful .\lbert Memorial Chapel also 
stands in the Lower Ward. Henry III began this chapel, 
Henry \"II rebuilt it, and Queen \'ictoria completed it 
in memory of her husband. King Edward \ II was bur- 
ied there in 1910. The Upper Ward, to the east, contains 
the royal apartments and great state rooms. These were 

built chiefly during the 1800's. G. Holmes Perkins 

WINDWARD ISLANDS are a group of British island 
territories that lie in the southeastern part of the West 
Indies. They stretch around the eastern end of the 
Caribbean Sea like stepping stones to South .\merica. 
For location, see West I.N'DtES (map). The islands are 
so named because they are exposed to the northeast 
trade winds. The Windward group includes Dominica, 
St. Lucia, St. \'incent, Grenada, and a small cluster 
called the Grenadines. Martinique, a French island, 
lies within the island group, but it is not considered a 
Windward island (see Martinique). 

The Windward Islands cover 821 square miles, and 
have a population of about 350,000. Nine out of 10 



WINE 

persons on the islands are Negroes. English is the 
official language, but many people speak a French 
dialect. The chief products of the islands include cacao, 
nutmeg, sugar, bananas, cotton, and arrowroot. 

Carib Indians were the first known inhabitants of the 
Windward Islands. .Some historians believe that Chris- 
topher Columbus discovered the islands. Europeans 
settled there in the early 1 (300's. Between 1 763 and 
1814. the islands became British colonies. w. l. Burn 

WINDWARD PASSAGE is a ship's channel between 
Cuba and Haiti, countries of the West Indies. It is about 
50 miles wide and connects the Atlantic Ocean with 
the Caribbean Sea. The Windward Passage is some- 
times called the Windward Channel. For location, see 
South ."^meric.^ (color map). 

WINE is the fermented juice of the grape or some other 
fruit. It is an alcoholic drink. No one knows who the 
firet wine makers were. We do know that the Egyptians 
knew how to make wine early in their civilization. 

Wine had a more practical reason in its beginning 
than the mere pleasure of drinking. Ancient peoples had 
little pure water to drink, and they learned that alcohol 
formed by fermentation protected fruit juice from spoil- 
ing. The people who drank this fermented juice did 
not get sick as often as those who drank the impure 
water. This reason for wine drinking continues down to 
our day. Many peoples, especially in the Latin coun- 
tries, use wine instead of water for drinking. 

Poets have sung the praises of wine throughout the 
ages. Homer, Pliny, and .Shakespeare wrote of the 
friendliness of wine. Omar Khaxyam painted an im- 
mortal picture of contentment with his verse in the 
Rubdiyat, "A loaf of bread, a jug of wine, and thou." 
The Bible has many references to wine. Many of these 
warn of the intoxicating powere of wine. One such refer- 
ence is, "Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, 
when it giveth his color in the cup ... at the last it 
biteth Hke a serpent, and stingeth like an adder" (Prov. 
23: 31-32). 

The Greek god Dionysus (called Bacchus by the 
Romans) not only was the god of wine, but also was 
looked on as the god of good living, a lawgiver, and a 
promoter of civilization (see Bacchus). Wine has come 
down through the ages as part of religious celebrations 
such as the Roman Catholic Mass, Jewish ceremonies, 
and some Protestant communion services. 

Most of the countries in the world produce wines of 
some kind or other. The leading countries in wine pro- 
duction include Italy, France, Spain, Portugal, Al- 
geria, and Argentina. California produces about 85 
per cent of the wine in the L'nited States. New York, 
New Jersey, and Illinois also produce some wines. 

How Wine Is Made. Some fruit juice ferments easily 
because it alread\' contains sugar. The most widely used 
fmits for wine are the grape, apple, cherr\', and black- 
berry. Wine falls into two general groups, dry and sweet, 
depending on the taste and the percentage of sugar 
remaining, or added, after fermentation. 

Mechanical crushers (presses) crush the wine grapes 
without breaking the seeds. In some countries, workers 
tread upon the grapes to break the skins. The must 
(juice from the crushing) rims into vats. The must 
then ferments until it reaches a desired stage. The 

283 



WINE 

first must that flows from the cnished fruit makes the 
choicest wines. When the fermentation has gone on to 
the stage desired, the wine is drawn off into casks called 
tuns. It remains in these casks until it is suitable for 
drinking. In this stage the chemical changes take place 
which fix the bouquet, or flavor and aroma, of the wine. 
Dry wines are made by allowing most of die sugar to 
turn into alcohol. The sweetness of sweet wines comes 
from the sugar allowed to remain or added to the wine. 
Wine is often classified according to the vintage, the year 
the crop was harvested. 

Types of Wine. Wines are classified according to 
strength and appearance. Light wines contain from 8 to 
14 per cent alcohol. They are red or white and are either 
still or sparkling, depending on whether they contain 
natural carbon dioxide or not. Carbon dioxide is the gas 
that forms during fermentation and makes sparkling 
wines bubble. The gas is allowed to escape from still 
wines before they are bottled. 

Claret is a still wine with a rich mby color. It contains 
from 12 to 14 per cent alcohol. It was first made in the 
French province of Bordeaux, which has long been 
famous for many types of wines. Other still wines include 
Burgundy, Chianti, Rhine, Sauterne, and Moselle. Bur- 
gundy and Moselle are also produced as sparkling wines 
by bottling the wine before the carbon dioxide gas 
escapes. The most famous of sparkling wines is cham- 
pagne, which is named for the French province where it 
was first produced. It is pale amber in color and contains 
about 12 per cent alcohol. 

Fortified wines are those in which spirits, usually 



LEADING WINE PRODUCING COUNTRIES 

Gallons of wine produced each year 



LEADING WINE PRODUCING STATES AND PROVINCES 

Gallons of wine produced each year 



California 

153,347,000 gal. 

New York wi 

10,440,000 gol. 

Ontario m 

7,980,000 gal. 

New Jersey S 

5,769,000 gal. 

Illinois i 

3,152,000 gal. 

Miciiigan i 

2,493,000 gal. 
Washington 5 

2,195,000 gal. 

Virginia ! 

1,432,000 gal. 

Ohio 

562,000 gal. 

Georgia ' 

350,000 gal. 



Italy 

1,601,393,000 gal. 

France 

1,450,792,000 gal. 

Spain 

520,767,000 gal. 

Argentina 

443,317,000 gal. 

Algeria 

422,090,000 gal. 

Portugal 

240,290,000 gal. 

Russia 

181,754,000 gal. 

United States 

180,529,000 gal. 

Germany (West) 

122,176,000 gal. 

Yugoslavia 

118,814,000 gal. 



Based on o 4-year average of government statistics. 



Based on a 4-year average of government statistics. 



brandy, are added to increase the strength, or alcoholic 
content. Sherry, one of the best known of this type, came 
originally from Jerez de la Frontera, Spain. It is amber 
colored, and contains from 18 to 21 per cent alcohol. 
There are both dry and sweet kinds of sherry. The most 
famous kinds of Spanish sherry are amontillado and 
manzanilla. Other fortified wines are port from Porto 
in Portugal, Marsala from Sicily, Malaga from Spain, 
Tokay from Hungary, Madeira from the islands of the 
same name, and muscatel. 

French and Italian vermouth, and Dubonnet are for- 
tified wines to which aromatic herbs and spices have 
been added. These are called aromatized wines. 

How Wine Is Served. There is a special wine for 
nearly every course in a meal. Each is supposed to 
enhance the flavor of the particular dish. Many persons 
prefer to serve only one wine with a meal, usually a red 
or white diy wine. When a number of wines are served 
with a formal dinner, they are served in a certain way. 
Dry sherr\' is sei-ved with the appetizer or soup. Any dry 
white wine goes well with oysters or fish. Meat courses 
are best accompanied by any dry red wine. A dry white 
wine should be served with creamed dishes. Burgundy 
is a favorite beverage with fowl or game. Port is usually 
served with cheese before dessert. A sparkling or sweet 
v/ine is good with dessert. 

Wine should be served in stemmed glasses which 
range in size fiom a small glass for port to the wide- 
brimmed champagne glass. Sparkling wines and some 
dry white wines are chilled. Most others are served at 
near room temperature. J- Bernard Robb 

See also Ch.mup.^gne; France (Agriculture; Manu- 
facturing); Grape. 



284 



WINFRID. See Boniface, Saint; Christmas (The 
Christmas Tree). 

WING. See Aerodynamics; Airplane (Wings); Avia- 
tion; Bee (Wings); Bird (How Birds Fly); Insect (Or- 
gans for Moving About). 

WING is the basic operational unit of the United 
States Air Force. It usually consists of a combat group, 
a maintenance and supply group, an air-base group, 
and a hospital unit. 

.See also Air Force, United .States (Organization 
of the Air Force). 

WINGATE'S RAIDERS were British commandos who 
fought behind Japanese lines in Burma during World 
War II. British Major General Orde C:harles Wingate 
led the raiders. He built his fighting force from mixed 
Burmese and British troops. 

Wingate organized his commandos in 1941, at the 
request of Field Marshal Archibald Wavell. Wingate 
called his commandos the Chindits, the name for the 
dragon statues in front of Burmese temples. In a few 
months, the well-trained Raiders began to slice behind 
Japanese lines. They cut railroad lines, blew up bridges 
and highways, exploded ammunition dumps, and de- 
stroyed military installations. 

Early in 1 944, a large force of Raiders seized impor- 
tant positions in Burma. American troops built an airfield 
behind Japanese lines and flew in necessary militai'y 
supplies to the Raiders. By the summer of 1944, the 
Raiders had penetrated deep into Japanese-held terri- 
tory. They cut the Burma railroad between M\itkyina 
and Katha, and supported General Joseph W. .Stilwell's 
Burma advance. Wingate died in an airplane crash in 
April, 1944, but his Raiders continued their fight 
against the Japanese. 

Wingate's Raiders accomplished a number of impor- 
tant aims. Through their activities, they relieved pressure 
on the Chinese, and probably prevented a Japanese 
invasion of India. They also gathered information for 
the British Royal Air Force. Fredekic; s. Marquardt 

.See also Commando; Rangers. 

WINGED BULL is an imaginary creature of .Assyrian 
sculpture. It has the head of a man and body of a bull, 
and wings on its shoulders. These winged bulls first 
appeared about 1000 B.C. They were placed in pairs at 
the entrance to an Assyrian palace to frighten away evil 
spirits. .Some winged bulls stand 1 7 feet high. They have 
five legs, so that from the side they appear to be walk- 
ing, while from the front they appear to stand still. 
The Persians later erected similar figures at their palace 

gates. Florence Hope 

WINGED LION is an imaginary creature found mainly 
in the art of Babylonia and Assyria. It is represented as 
a figure with the head of a man, the wings of an eagle, 
and the body of a lion. Winged lions, like winged bulls, 
often stood in pairs at the entrance gate of a king's 
palace. They were supposed to frighten away enemies 
or evil spirits. The sculptors carved the lions with five 
legs. From the side they appear to be walking, but from 
the front they seem to be standing still. A much later 
example of a winged lion is the one standing today in 
Saint Mark's .Square in \'enice, Italv. Florence Hope 

WINGED VICTORY, or NIKE, .\/ kee, OF SAMO- 
THRACE, SAM oh thrays, is a beautiful Greek statue 
that stands in the Louvre Museum in Paris.The Winged 
Victory was found in 1 863 on the island of Samothrace 



WINNETKA PLAN 

in the Aegean Sea. The statue was in many fragments. 
Later they were pieced together, but the figure remained 
headless and armless. In 1950, its right hand was found 
and reunited with the statue. The statue was set up by 
the Greeks to honor Nike, goddess of victory and mes- 
senger of Zeus and Athena. No one knows who made 
the statue, or when. .Some scholars place its date around 
300 B.C., while others believe it to be a work of the loo's 
B.C. It is one of the finest examples of the sculpture of 

the Hellenistic period. Florence Hope 

.See also .Aviation (picture); Louvre (picture). 
WINGLESS VICTORY. .Sec .Xcroioi is. 
WINKELRIED, I7,\6 kul red, ARNOLD VON, is the 

legendary national hero of Switzerland. He was sup- 
posed to have brought victory to the Swiss in the battle 
of .Sempach against the Austrians in 1386. According 
to legend, the .Swiss were beginning to retreat when 
Winkelried, a Swiss soldier, dashed boldly into the 
Austrian ranks and seized with his bare hands as many 
enemy spears as he could reach. As he fell, pierced by 
the spears, he created a gap in the Austrian ranks. The 
.Swiss rushed through the opening, and won the battle 
in hand-to-hand fighting. Arthur m. Selvi 

WINNEBAGO, LAKE. See Lake Winnebago. 

WINNEBAGO INDIANS, ii/.v ee BAY goh, were an 
eastern woodland tribe related to the .Sioux. Tribal 
traditions say that at one time their home was near the 
Missouri River, but that they were forced east and 
settled near Green Bay in Wisconsin. 

The language of the Winnebago resembled that of 
the Sioux in many ways (see Sioux Indians). They 
hunted buflalo, caught fish, and raised corn and squash. 
They built long lodges with arched roofs and arbors 
over the entrances. Chiefs, who were sometimes women, 
inherited their rank. Important tribal ceremonies in- 
cluded the Medicine Dance, organized around a secret 
society, and the Winter Feast, a war ceremony. 

The Winnebago were nearly destroyed by the Illinois 
sometime before 1670. But small groups continued to 
live along Lake Winnebago and elsewhere in southern 
Wisconsin and northern Illinois. They were friendly to 
most nearby tribes, and to the French. During the 
Revolutionary War and the War of 181 2, the Winne- 
bago sided with Great Britain. Some Winnebago lived 
in a village, now called Prophetstown, on the Rock 
River in Illinois. The town was named after their leader, 
Wabokieshiek (White Cloud), who was called the 
Prophet. The Winnebago ceded their lands in Wiscon- 
sin and Illinois to the federal government in the 1830's. 
They were moved to Minnesota, then to .South Dakota, 
and finally to Nebraska. .Some refused to leave Wiscon- 
sin and Minnesota, and still live there. Wayne c. Temple 

.See also Nicolet, Je.^n (picture). 

WINNETKA PLAN is a name sometimes given to a 
philosophy of education. The plan developed in the 
public eleinentary and junior high schools of Winnetka, 
111., after World War I. It influenced widely the growth 
of the progressive education moveinent. According to 
the plan, teachers deal with each pupil individually so 
that each can develop his own particular abilities at his 
own rate of speed. Pupils work alone in their regular 
studies, but take part in many group activities in which 
their achievements are not measured. 

28^ 




Downtown Winnipeg, left, 
has many modern office build- 
ings and industrial plants. Ttie 
St. Boniface Basilica, above, 
in ttie suburb of St. Boniface, 
ranks as the largest church in 
western Canada. 



WINNIPEG (pop. 265,429; alt. 764 ft.) is the capital 
of Manitoba and the largest city in the Prairie Prov- 
inces. Winnipeg has the fourth largest metropolitan 
area in Canada. About 475,000 persons, over half 
the province's population, live in the metropolitan 
area. The city lies on the muddy Red River (see 
Manitoba [map]). Winnipeg derived its name from 
the Cree words win nipiy, which mean inuddy waters. 
Winnipeg sei-ves as a transportation, marketing, and 
manufacturing center. It is the principal distributing 
point for products shipped west from eastern Canada. 
The city is often called Canada's Gateway to the West. 
It also serves as the financial and commercial head- 
quarters of western Canada. The city has one of the 
largest railroad yards maintained by one railway sys- 
tem, those of the Canadian Pacific Railway. Winnipeg 
is also the center of Canada's grain trade, and has one 
of the largest stockyards in the British Commonwealth. 

Location and Description. Winnipeg lies on a wide, 
flat plain al the junction of the Red River and its 
largest tributary, the Assiniboine.The corner of Portage 
Avenue (the beginning of the old overland route to 
Edmonton) and Main .Street (once a settlers' trail that 
ran parallel to the Red River) forms the center of down- 
town Winnipeg. The city grew up where these trails 
met. Several bridges across the Red and Assiniboine 
rivers connect Winnipeg with its suburbs. 

Railroad tracks cut through Winnipeg in all direc- 



tions. The stations and hotels of the two Canadian 
national railroads rank among the city's finest buildings. 
The Manitoba Legislative Building stands in The Mall, 
a landscaped park overlooking the Assiniboine River. 
Nearby are the Law Courts and the Civic Auditorium. 
City Hall is in the center of the downtown district. The 
Cenotaph, a memorial to the Manitoba dead of World 
Wars I and II, stands at the foot of Memorial Boule- 
vard. St. John's Anglican Cathedral is in the northern 
part of the city. Wellington Crescent, a beautiful park- 
way, winds along the Assiniboine River. 

The legislature and other buildings are made of Tyn- 
dall limestone, quarried a few miles from the city. Most 
of the stores, offices, and apartments are brick, but most 
houses are made of wood or stucco. 

Winnipeg has about 80 parks, squares, and athletic 
fields. Assiniboine Park, covering 282 acres, is the largest 
park. The city also has a museum and an art gallery. 
Educational insdtutions include the University of Man- 
itoba, Saint John's College, Saint Paul's College, and 
United College. 

Industry. Winnipeg ranks as a leading manufac- 
tuiing center in Canada. Winnipeg produces 85 per 
cent of Manitoba's manufactures, and about 40 per 
cent of the goods manufactured in the Prairie Prov- 
inces. 

The city's chief industries include clothing; meat 
packing; milling flour and feed;printing,publishing,and 



286 



bookbinding; brewing; baking; oil and sugar refining; 
repairing railroad equipment; and food processing. 
Other products include structural steel, bricks, boilers, 
tractors and farm machinery, wood products, tents, and 
cement. 

Transportation. Winnipeg ranks as Canada's rail- 
road center. The two national Canadian railways serve 
the city, and their branch lines fork out in all directions. 
Three United States railroads also serve Winnipeg. 
The Trans-Canada Highway and Manitoba's main 
highways pass through the city. 

Four airlines serve Winnipeg. They are Canadian 
Pacific, Northwest, Trans-Canada, and Trans-.Mr Lim- 
ited. Trans-Air Limited maintains headquarters there. 
The Royal Canadian Air Force has its training com- 
mand headquarters and a training base at Winnipeg. 

History. Winnipeg is the oldest city in the Prairie 
Pro\inces. The French explorer Pierre Gaultier, Sieur 
de la X'erendrye, built Fort Rouge on the site in 1 738. 
During the early 1800's, Winnipeg became the scene of 
fur-trade rivalry between the North West Company and 
the Hudson's Bay Company. The "Nor' Westers" built 
Fort Gibraltar in 1810 near the site of Fort Rouge. The 
Hudson's Bay traders erected Fort Douglas about a 
mile north. In 1821, the two companies joined, and a 
larger Fort Garry was built in 1 835. 

In 1870, the province of Manitoba entered the Domin- 
ion of Canada. Fort Garry's name was changed to Win- 
nipeg, and it became the capital of the new province. 
Railroads built in the 1880's linked Winnipeg to eastern 
Canada, and the city rapidly became the transportation 
and grain-distributing center of the west. Winnipeg was 
incorporated as a city in 1873. w. L. Morton 

WINNIPEG, lake! .See Lake Winnipeg. 

WINNIPEG RIVER is part of the Saskatchewan-Nel- 
son river system that empties into Hudson Bay. The 
river is 140 miles long. It rises in Western Ontario and 
flows west in a winding course, draining the Lake of 
the Woods. It empties into Lake Winnipeg, near the 
city of Winnipeg. The Whitehall Atomic Research 
Center was built beside the Winnipeg River about 68 
miles northeast of Winnipeg. The river supplies power 
for Winnipeg. Bogs and granite ridges line its upper 
course. During pioneer days, the Winnipeg River was 
on the fur-trade route to the northwest. F'or location, 
see Manitob.\ (physical map). D. M. L. Farr 

WINNIPEGOSIS, LAKE. See Lake Winnipegosis. 

WINNIPESAUKEE, LAKE. See Lake Winnipes.\ukee. 

WINONA, Minn. (pop. 24,895; alt. 660 ft.), is a 
manufacturing and trading center on the Mississippi 
River in southeastern Minnesota (see Minnesota 
[map]). Bluffs surround the city on three sides, and 
Wisconsin hills face it from across the Mississippi. 
Winona has about 80 manufacturing plants. It serves 
as a shipping point for grain and vegetables grown in 
the area. The city is the home of Winona State College, 
St. Mary's College, and the College of St. Teresa. 
Settlers founded Winona in 1851 as a Mississippi River 
port. They named the settlement after a legendary 
Sioux Indian girl. The town developed into a lumbering 
and wheat-shipping center. A new barge dock opened 
in 1958. Winona is the seat of Winona County and the 
headquarters for the LTpper Mississippi River \Vildlife 
and Fish Refuge. It has a mayor-council type of 

government. Harold T. Hago 



WINSTON-SALEM STATE COLLEGE 

WINONA STATE COLLEGE is a coeducational state 
teachers college at Winona, Minn. It offers bachelor's 
degrees and an M.S. in Education. Winona State Col- 
lege was a part of Minnesota State Teachers College 
until 1957. At that time it became separately accredited. 
Founded in 1858, it is the oldest teacher-training insti- 
tution west of the Mississippi River. For enrollment, 
see LfNivERSiTiES and Colleges (table). 

WINSLOW, EDWARD ( 1 595- 1 655). a founder of Ph-m- 
outh Colony, joined the Pilgrims at Leiden, The 
Netherlands, and came to Plymouth on the Mayflower. 
He and Susanna White became the first to marry in the 
new colony. He arranged the first treaty with Massasoit, 
and explored and traded with the Indians. Winslow 
served as an assistant for 20 years and governor of the 
colon)' for three. Winslow left Plymouth in 1646 and 
served in Oliver Cromwell's government in England. 

He was born at Droitwich, England. Bradford Smith 

WINSLOW, JOHN ANCRUM. See Alabama (the 

ship). 

WINSOR, FREDERICK ALBERT. See Gas (Discovery 
of Manufactured Gas). 

WINSOR, JUSTIN (1831-1897), was an American 
historian and librarian. His first ambition was to be an 
author, and he wrote many books and articles. Winsor 
became interested in libraries after his appointment in 
1866 as a Boston Public Libraiy trustee. He became 
librarian at the Boston Public Library in 1868, and at 
Harvard College in 1877. Winsor promoted the develop- 
ment of libraries throughout the country, and sei-ved as 
first president of the American Library Association. He 
was bom in Boston. He wrote his Narrative and Critical 
History of America in eight volumes. R. B. Domns 

WINSOR DAM, sometimes called Quabbin Dam, is a 
water-supph- project on the Swift River in western 
Massachusetts. It stands 295 feet high, with a top length 
of 2,640 feet. An earth dam, it contains 4,000,000 
cubic yards of materials. The Metropolitan Water Dis- 
trict of Massachusetts completed the dam in 1940. 
Winsor Dam and Quabbin Dike, built in 1937, form 
Quabbin Reservoir. The reservoir provides the main 
water supply for the city of Boston and stores 1 ,265,000- 
acre-feet of water. T. w. Mermel 

WINSTON-SALEM, N.C. (pop. 111,135; met. area 
189,428; alt. 860 ft.), has one of the largest tobacco- 
manufacturing plants in the world and one of the 
largest leaf-tobacco markets. Winston-Salem lies in 
northwestern North Carolina about 30 miles from 
the Blue Ridge Mountains. Winston-Salem plants pro- 
duce men's and bo)'s' undenvear, hosiery, furniture, 
electronic equipment, and tobacco products. Salem 
College, Wake Forest College, and several other schools 
are located in the city. A group of Moravians founded 
Salem in 1 766. Winston was founded in 1849. Winston 
and Salem consolidated in 1913. The city has a coun- 
cil-manager government. Huoh t. lefler 

WINSTON-SALEM STATE COLLEGE is a state- 
controlled coeducational school at Winston-Salem, 
N.C. Courses lead to B.S. degrees in education and 
nursing. In 1925, it became the first Negro college in 
the L^nited States to grant degrees for elementary teach- 
ers. The college was founded in 1892. For enrollment, 
see Universities and Colleges (table). 

287 



WINTER 

WINTER is one of the four seasons of the year. In the 
northern half of the world, winter begins about Decem- 
ber 21 and lasts until about March 21. During this time 
the weather is cold. Winter has fewer hours of daylight 
because of the path the earth takes as it revolves aroimd 
the sun. The earth completely revolves around the sun 
during one year. The earth's axis always tips about 
23i degrees from a line perpendicular to its path. The 
sun's rays fall directly over the farthest point south 
of the equator about December 2 1 or 22. This marks the 
first day of winter in the Northern Hemisphere. In the 
.Southern Hemisphere, winter begins in June. 

The winter season changes according to the region. 
For example, in the polar regions, winter takes up half 
of the year. In the Temperate Zones winter takes up 
about one quarter of the year. Grace Humphrey 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Blizzard February March 

December January Season 

WINTER HAVEN, Fla. (pop. 16,277; alt. 140 ft.), is a 
resort town in south-central Florida (see Florida 
[color map]). About 100 lakes lie within five miles of the 
city, and about 75,000 acres of citrus groves surround it. 
The town has 30 fruit-packing plants and canneries. 
Founded in 1863 and incorporated in 1911, it has a 
council-manager government. Kathryn Abbey Han.na 

WINTER PARK, Fla. (pop. 17,162; ah. 95 ft.), lies 
around six lakes on the northeast edge of Orlando (see 
Florida [color map]). It is often called Florida's Cul- 
tural Capital. 

Most activities of Winter Park center around Rollins 
College and the University Club. The city's cultural 
activities include art, music, and theater programs. 
Winter Park was fotmded as Lakeview in 1858. Its 
name was changed to Osceola in 1870. It became 
Winter Park in 1881, when a group of residents from 
New England laid out a new townsite. Rollins College 
was founded at Winter Park in 1885. The city has a 
council-manager government. Kathryn Abbey Hanna 

WINTER SLEEP. See Hibernation. 

WINTER SPORTS. .See Curling; Hockey; Ice Yacht- 
ing; Ice Sk.\ting; Skiing; Tobogg.\ning; and the 
Annual Events section in various state and province 
articles, such as Colorado (Annual Events). 

WINTERBERRY is the name of a shrub related to the 
holly. Many winterberries grow on swampy land in the 
eastern United States. The winterberry is sometimes 
known as the black alder, or deciduous holly. It grows 6 to 
12 feet tall. Its bright red berries appear in November. 
The branches of the winterberrv-, loaded with berries, 
are popular as house decorations. 

Scientific Classification. The winterberry belongs to 
the family AquifoUaceae. It is classified as genus Ilex, 
species /. verlicillala. J- J- levkon 

WINTERBLOOM. See Witch H.\zel. 

WINTERGREEN is a hardy woodland plant that bears 
white flowers. It grows in almost all parts of the North- 
em Hemisphere and received its name because its 
leaves remain green all winter. The name also applies to 
other plants of this type. The wintergreen is a low- 
growing shrub with creeping, or subterranean, stems. 
Its glossy oval leaves cluster at the top of short, erect 
reddish branches. Its attractive flowers are shaped like 

288 




Leaves, Flowers, and Berries of the Wintergreen 

urns. They cannot be seen easily because the plant's 
leaves hide them. The plant also produces a bright red 
berr&gt;'. Birds feed on these benies during the winter. 
Wintergreen provides a pleasant-smelling, pleasant- 
tasting oil. This oil ser\'es as a flavoring for candy, medi- 
cine, chewing gum, and tooth powder. 

Scientific Classification. Wintergreen belongs to the 
heath family, Ericaceae. It is genus Gaultheria, species 
G. procunibens. Harold Norman Moldenke 

WINTER'S TALE. See Shakespeare, William (Types 
of Pla&gt;s; table. The Fourth Period). 

WINTHROP is the family name of three American 
colonial leaders, father, son, and grandson. 

John Winthrop (1588-1649) was a Puritan governor of 
the Massachusetts Bay colony. He was born in Edward- 
stone, Suffolk, England, of well-to-do countr)' people. 
In 1602 he went to Cambridge University. He married 
at 1 7, practiced law, and became devoutly religious. In 
1629 he became go%'ernor of the Massachusetts Bay 
Company, and in 1630 reached Salem on the Arbella, 
along with a fleet canying 700 passengers. Taking over 
the government froin John Endecott, Winthrop soon 
settled Boston. He helped establish a Congregational 
church, and led the colony through the first hard winter. 
He was governor almost continuously until his death. 

Winthrop's principles were high, and he tended to be 



John Winthrop (1 588- 1 649) 

Culvir 



John Winthrop ( 1 606- 1 676) 

Culver 




aristocratic. In any community, he said, "the best part 
is always the least, and of that part the wiser part is 
always the lesser." Yet he knew how to be lenient, as 
when he "cured" a thief of stealing from his woodpile 
during a cold winter by telling him to help himself. He 
took part in all the major affairs of the colony, such as 
forming the New England Confederation. 

John Winthrop, Jr. (1606-1676), was a colonial gover- 
nor of Connecticut. He came to America in 1631. In 
1633 he founded the town of Ipsw'ich, Mass. He repre- 
sented Massachusetts Bay colony in England in 1634. 
He returned to govern a new colony at Saybrook, Conn. 
In 1646 Winthrop founded what is now New London, 
Conn., and later he served as governor of Connecticut. 
He was born at Groton, England. 

John Winthrop ril (1638-1 707), son of John Winthrop, 
Jr., served in Richard Cromwell's parliamentary army 
in England. He returned home to fight the Dutch and 
Indians, and was rescued by Indian friends when Gov- 
ernor Leisler of New York tried to execute him for fail- 
ing to capture Montreal in 1690. For the last 10 years of 
his life, Winthrop was governor of Connecticut. He was 
born in Ipswich, Mass. Bradford Sm:th 



WIRE 

WINTHROP COLLEGE, the South Carolina College 
for Women, is at Rock Hill, S.C. Students may major 
in business, education, home economics, journalism, 
liberal arts and sciences, music, and physical educa- 
tion. Founded in 1886 as a training school for teachers, 
it is one of the largest women's colleges in the United 
States. For enrollment, see Universities and Colleges 

(tablej. Davton Young Roberts 

WINTON, ALEXANDER. See Automobile (Famous 
Men in the Automobile Industry). 

WIRE is a long, thin, flexible metal rod which has a 
uniform cross section. Only ductile metals, or metals that 
can be drawn out, can be used for making wire. The 
chief ductile metals are copper, iron, brass, platinum, 
gold, silver, and aluminum. 

How Wire Is Made. From early ages until the 1300's, 
wire was made by haminering metal into plates. These 
plates were then cut into strips and rounded by beating. 
Then crude methods of "drawing" wire were introduced. 
Machine-drawn wire was first made in England in the 
middle 1800's. Machines now entirely replace hand 



WIRE SIZES 








GAUGE 
NUMBER 



4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 



DIAMETER 
IN INCHES 



7 
32 



3 
16 



5 
32 



3 

32 



1 



Wire Has Many important Uses on the farm, in the home, in business, and in 
industry. Woven wire and barbed wire fences, be/ow, enclose cattle on ranches and 
farms throughout the country. Wire differs greatly in size, finish, appearance, 
tensile strength, and ductility according to its particular use. 

Republic Steel Corp. 







HOW WIRE IS MANUFACTURED 



u. 



(iJt 





Billet 



-...•Bt.i™M^ Billets are reheated and run through a series of rollers, which press 

them to smaller and longer form. Finally they emerge as long rods. 
White-hot steel ingots are rolled into long The rods are coiled by machine, allowed to cool, and checked for size, 
two-inch square bars called "billets." They 
weigh from 200 to 400 pounds. 



Rod Coil 




Rods ore cleaned chemically, then heated 
in a "baker" to remove all brittleness. 



w 




Rods ore next fed through dies of winding blocks. Holes in 
the dies are progressively smaller As the rod passes through 
them, it becomes still longer and thinner, until it Is wire. 



labor. Steel or iron billets, two-inch square blocks of 
metal, are heated and run through a series of rollers 
which press them into smaller and longer shapes. They 
come out as long rods about j inch in diameter. The 
rods are wound on reels while still hot, and cleansed in 
sulfuric acid and water. 

Pulling the rods through a series of tungsten carbide 
dies draws them out thin to form wire. The die has a 
funnel-like shape with a round opening smaller than 
the rod. The rod, pointed at one end by hammering, 
may be run into the die as thread runs through the eye 
of a needle. As soon as the pointed end passes through 
the die, it is seized with a pair of pincers and drawn far 
enough to be attached to an upright drum. The drum 
rotates, pulling the wire through the die. The wire 
winds on the drum. Fine wire may be drawn through a 
series of dies. Because drawn wire has a tendency to 
harden, it is softened and made less brittle by being 
heated in a furnace. For drawing the finest kinds of 
wire, extremely hard dies made of diamonds are used. 

Sizes of Wire. The size of wire differs according to its 
gauge, or diameter. American, or Brown and Sharpe, is the 
standard gauge used in the United States for copper 
and other nonferrous wire. This gauge varies from No. 
000000, which equals 0.58 inch in diameter, to No. 51, 
which is .000878 inch. A number of other United States 
standards are used. Sometimes the Imperial gauge of 
England is used. France and Germany use gauges based 
on the millimeter. The steel wire gauge is the standard 
gauge for steel wire in the United States. The shape of 



wire may be square, oval, fiat, or triangular, to meet 
special requirements, but most wire is round. 

Uses of Wire. Manufacturers make telegraph, tele- 
phone, and trolley wires of copper, which is unusually 
ductile and one of the best conductors of electricity. The 
extremely thin wires used in telescopes are made of 
platinum. These have been drawn out to a thinness of 
5 0,000 of 3n inch. People find other important uses for 
wire in making nails, fences, delicate watch springs, 
screens, and strings for musical and scientific instru- 
ments. Wire netting, gauze, and cloth are woven from 
wires. Wire ropes and cables consist of a number of 
single wires twisted together. Large suspension bridges, 
such as the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco, hang 
supported by steel-wire cables. Each cable consists of 
many separate wires which have been twisted together 
for flexibility and strength. Walter R. Williams, Jr. 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Annealing Fence 

Barbed Wire Galvanized Iron and Steel 

Copper (Copper Wire) Wire Glass 

Ductility 

WIRE GLASS consists of sheets of glass from j- to j- 
inch thick which contain a wire mesh embedded during 
the manufacturing process. The wire mesh strengthens 
the glass and holds it in place after breakage occurs. It 
has been used widely for windows and doors. The in- 
vention of wire glass is attributed to two men, Frank 
Shuman of Philadelphia and Leon Appert of France. 
They achieved practically the same result by different 



290 



processes. The Appert jyrocess consists of rolling one sheet 
of glass and la)-ing the meshed wire on it, then rolling 
another sheet of glass on the top and pressing the wire 
and the sheets of glass into one solid sheet. The Shuman 
process consists of rolling one sheet of glass, into which 
the wire netting is pressed and rolled. Wire glass can 
also be made by placing the wire on a casting table and 
holding it in position while glass is poured around it. 
One surface of wire glass is always smooth, and the 
other may be figured with various designs to diffuse 
light and obscure vision. Wire glass is usually J-inch 

thick. C.J. Phillips 

WIRE-HAIRED FOX TERRIER is a small dog with a 
thick coat of harsh, bristly hair. These dogs are descend- 
ants of the black and tan terriers of England, which 
were used hundreds of years ago to hunt fo.xes. After the 
foxhounds had trailed a fo.x, the terriers were released to 
dig it out of its hiding place. Some fox terriers have 
smooth hair. The wire-haired fox terrier has wiry, or 
broken, hair. Its white coat is marked with patches of 
black or brown. Like most other terriers, the wire- 
haired fox terrier has a sturdy, square body. It makes an 
excellent pet because of its liveliness and friendly dis- 
position. .See also Fox Terrier. Josephine z. rine 
WIRE RECORDER. See Tape Recorder (How Tape 
Recorders Work). 

WIRELESS. See Radio (table, Radio Terms). 
WIREPHOTO. See Telephoto. 

WIRETAPPING usually means the interception of a 
telephone message by attaching a wire to a telephone 
line or to a telephone switchboard. The intercepted 
message is frequently recorded on a tape recorder. Wire- 
tapping, under certain circumstances, is legal. Law- 
enforcement officers may obtain court permission to use 
wiretaps while conducting a criminal investigation. 
Businessmen may use tape recordings to make a record 
of their business telephone calls, provided that they use 
a recorder with a "beep" sound to warn others that the 
conversation is being recorded. But the right of a person 
to speak freely and without fear of eavesdroppers is con- 
sidered so important that many state and federal laws 
prohibit wiretapping. Many intercepted messages, 
therefore, are intercepted illegally. 

The development of new electronic devices for eaves- 
dropping has broadened the legal concept of wiretap- 
ping. A microphone may be hidden in a room. Wires 
from the microphone may lead to an amplifier or 
speaker in another room. The microphone may be 
attached to a recording machine at some other location. 
Other types of microphones may be attached to a wall 
or a door so that the investigator may overhear conver- 
sations through the partition. Directional microphones 
may be beamed or focused in such a way that they may 
pick up conversations as far as 100 feet away. Minia- 
ture microphones and transmitters may be concealed 
in small, remote locations, where they may send out 
their messages to a radio receiver hundreds of feet away. 
None of these devices actually involves tapping a wire. 
But some state laws cover all these secret methods of 
interception under the general heading '"Wiretapping." 
Wiretapping was first called to public attention 
after passage of Amendment 18 to the United States 
Constitudon in 1919. This amendment established pro- 
hibition (see Prohibition). Law-enforcement officers 
found this amendment difficult to enforce. They turned 



WIRTZ, WILLIAM WILLARD 

to the use of wiretapping devices to gather evidence 
for criminal trials. 

The question of using wiretap evidence in a criminal 
trial came squarely before the Supreme Court of the 
United States for the first dme in 1928. In the case of 
Oimstead versus United States, the Court held in a close 
decision that wiretapping is not a '"search" or a '"sei- 
zure." Thus, the Court refused to outlaw wiretapping 
on constitutional grounds. Wiretap evidence was not 
questioned seriously again until 1937. Then, in the case 
of Nardone versus United States, the Court held that in- 
formation obtained by wiretapping could not be dis- 
closed by an officer or agent of the federal government 
in a federal court. The ruling was based on Section 605 
of the Federal Communications Act. This law, enacted 
in 1934, provided stronger federal control over tele- 
phone, telegraph, and radio systems. 

Since 1937, the Supreme Court of the United States 
has imposed additional restrictions on the use of wire- 
tap evidence in federal courts, through a series of deci- 
sions. Generally speaking, federal agents cannot use 
wiretap evidence. State laws vary from an absolute 
prohibition of wiretapping to controlled wiretapping. 
Section 605 of the Federal Communications Act, to date, 
only indirectly affects the use of wiretap evidence in 

state courts. Fr.\nk D. Day; Joseph D. Nicol; Ralph F. Turner 

WIREWORM is the name given to the hard-skinned 
grubs, or larvae, of click beetles. They received their 
name because they look somewhat like a piece of wire. 



r "^'i' 



^ 



The Wireworm CQUses Great Damage to Farm Crops. 

These grubs usually live in the earth or in decaying 
wood for two or three years. They often do great damage 
to crops by eating the roots of plants. Wireworms appear 
yellowish or brownish in color and measure from j- to \- 
inch long. They have three pairs of legs. Sometimes the 
farmers rotate the crops to help reduce the number of 
wireworms. Or they may apply insecticides to the soil, 
either as pure granules or in liquid fertilizer. 

Scientific Classification. Wireworms are in the order 
Coleopleta. They form the family Elateridae. h. h. Ross 

See also Click Beetle. 

WIRT, WILLIAM ALBERT. See Indiana (Schools); 
Platoon School. 

WIRTZ, WILLIAM WILLARD (1912- ), was ap- 
pointed Secretary of Labor by President John F. Ken- 
nedy in 1962. He succeeded Arthur J. Goldberg, who 
became an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the 
United States. Wirtz served as Lhider Secretary of Labor 
from 1961 until his appointment as Secretary. He was a 
professor at Northwestern University Law School from 
1946 to 1954, then practiced law in Chicago until 1961 . 

Wirtz was born in DeKalb, 111. He was graduated 
from Beloit College and Harvard Law School. He 
served as chairman of the National Wage Stabilization 
Board in 1946. Erio sevareid 

291 




WISCONSIN 





'■•b, 
-^^ 



.■:f:\ 



yS^J^ The Badger State 




Sailboats in a Harbor in Door County 



FACTS IN BRIEF 



Capitol: Madison. 

Government: Congress — U.S. Senators, 2; U.S. Repre- 
sentatives, 10. Electoral Votes, 12. State Legislature — 
senators, 33; assemblymen, 100. Counties, 72. Voting 
Age, 21 years. 

Areo: 56,154 square miles (including 1,449 square miles 
of inland water), 26th in size among the states. Great- 
est Distances: (north-south) 320 miles; (east-west) 295 
miles. Shoreline, 673 miles. 

Elevation: Highest, Tim's Hill, 1,953 feet above sea level, 
in Price County. Lowest, 581 feet above sea level, 
along the western shore of Lake Michigan. 

Population: 3,951,777 (1960 census), 15th among the 
states. Density, 70 persons to the square mile. Distri- 
bution, urban, 64 per cent; rural, 36 per cent. Esti- 
mated 1965 Population, 4,271,000. 

Ctiief Products: Manufacturing, automotive products and 
other transportation equipment, beer, food products, 
machinery, metal products, paper and related prod- 
ucts. Agriculture, beef cattle and hogs, cherries, corn, 
cranberries, dairy products, hay, honey, oats. Alining, 
clay, lead, sand and gravel, stone, zinc. 

Stoteliood: May 29, 1848, the 30th state. 

State Motto: Forward. 

State Song: "On, Wisconsin!" Words by Carl Beck; 
music by William T. Purdy. 

292 



WISCONSIN is a midwestern state that has long been 
famous for its dairy products. Thousands of herds of 
milk cows graze on the rich, green pastures of the rolling 
Wisconsin countryside. They make Wisconsin the na- 
tion's leading milk producer. The state also produces 
more than 40 per cent of the country's cheese, over 20 
per cent of its butter, and all its malted milk powder. 
This tremendous output of dairy products has earned 
Wisconsin the title of America's Dairyland. But manu- 
facturing, not agriculture, is Wisconsin's chief industry. 
The value of goods manufactured in Wisconsin is four 
times as great as the state's fanning income. 

Wisconsin is one of the leading states in the manu- 
facture of engines, turbines, and other nonelectrical 
machinery. It is also an important producer of elec- 
trical machinery, such as electric motors and household 
appliances. Wisconsin ranks among the top states in 
aiUomobile production. Its factories also turn out other 
transportation equipment, including pleasure boats, 
house trailers, and railroad equipment. The state is a 
leader in canning peas, sweet corn, and other vegetables, 
as well as in processing many daily products. Wiscon- 
sin brews more beer than any other state. The thick 
forests that cover almost half the state help provide the 
basis for another important industry — papermaking. 
Wisconsin leads the nation in the value of paper pro- 
duction. 

The natural beauty and recreational resources of 
Wisconsin attract millions of vacationers every year. 
Wisconsin has more than 8,000 lakes to delight swim- 
mers, fishermen, and boaters. Hikers and horseback 
riders follow paths through the deep, cool north woods 
of Wisconsin. Hunters shoot game animals in the forests 
and fields. In winter, sports fans enjoy skiing and to- 
bogganing down the snow-covered hills, and iceboating 
on the frozen lakes. 

Wisconsin has won fame as one of the nation's most 
progressive states. An important reform movement 
called Progressivism started in Wisconsin during the early 
1900's. The state began many educational, social, polit- 
ical, and economic reforms that were later adopted by 
other states and the federal government. Many of these 
reforms were sponsored by the La FoUettes, one of the 
most famous families in American political history. 

Wisconsin led the way to direct primary elections, 
regulation of public utilities and railroads, pensions for 
mothers and teachers, minimum-wage laws, and work- 
men's compensation. Wisconsin also was the first state 
to end the death penalty for crime. 

The first schools for training rural teachers were es- 
tablished in Wisconsin. The state also set up the first 
vocational schools. The University of Wisconsin was 
one of the first imiversities to offer correspondence 



I 




Crosse by Carl Verburgt for the Field Enterprises Ediicational Corporation Collect !■ 



courses. The nation's first kindergarten began in Wis- 
consin. Wisconsin established the first Hbrary for state 
legislators. 

Wisconsin has been a leader in the development of 
farmers' institutes and cooperatives, dairymen's asso- 
ciations, and cheese-making federations. The Republi- 
can party was founded in Wisconsin. One of the nation's 
first hydroelectric plants was installed in Wisconsin. 
Wisconsin was the first state to adopt the number 
system for marking highways. It passed the first law 
requiring safety belts in all new cars bought in the state. 

Wisconsin is an Indian word. There are several pos- 
sible meanings of the word, including gathering of the 
icaters, tcild rice country, and home land. W'isconsin has 
been nicknamed the Badger State, and its people are 
known as Badgers. This nickname was first used for Wis- 
consin lead miners in the 1 820's. Some of these miners 
lived in caves they dug out of the hillsides. They re- 
minded people of badgers burrowing holes in the ground. 

Madison is the capital of Wisconsin, and Milwaukee 
is the largest city. For the relationship of Wisconsin to 
other states in its region, see the article on the Mid- 
western States. 




Wisconsin (blue) ranks 26th in size among all the states, and 
10th in size among the Midwestern States (gray). 



The eojitnbiitois of this article are Robert IV. Finley, As- 
sociate Professor of Geography at the Vuiversity oj Wis- 
consin; Lawrence H. Fitzpatrick, Managing Editor of the 
Wisconsin State Journal; and Eric Edwin Lampard, Pro- 
fessor of History at the University oj Wisconsin. 



293 



WISCONSIN/^^^^^^^^^^ 



Constitution. Wisconsin is still governed under its 
original constitution, adopted in 1848. Only six other 
states are governed under older constitutions. An 
amendment to Wisconsin's constitution may be pro- 
posed in either house of the state legislature. The 
amendment then must be approved by a majority of 
each house in two successive legislative sessions. Next, 
it must be approved by a majority of the persons who 
vote on the amendment. The constitution may also be 
amended by a constitutional convention. A proposal to 
call such a convention must be approved by a majority 
of the legislature and by a majority of the persons voting 
on the proposal. 

Executive. The governor of Wisconsin holds office 
for a two-year term. He can serve an unlimited number 
of terms. The governor receives a yearly salary of 
$25,000. For a list of all the governors of Wisconsin, see 
the History section of this article. 

The lieutenant governor, secretary of state, attorney 
general, and treasurer are also elected to two-year terms. 
The governor appoints more than 80 state officers. Most 
of them are part-time members of boards and commis- 
sions. About half of these officials must be approved by 
the state senate. 

Legislature consists of a senate of 33 members and an 
assembly of 100 members. Voters in each of 33 sena- 
torial districts elect one senator to a four-year term. One 
assemblyman is elected from each of 1 00 assembly dis- 
tricts. Assemblymen serve two-year terms. The legisla- 
ture meets in regular session on the second Wednesday 
in January in odd-numbered years. There is no time 
limit on the sessions, which usually last from six to 
eight months. The governor may call special sessions of 



the legislature. Such sessions also have no time limit. 

Courts. The highest court in Wisconsin is the state 
supreme court. It has seven justices, elected to 10-year 
terms. The justice who has been on the court for the 
longest time serves as the chief justice. Other Wisconsin 
courts include circuit and county courts. The people 
elect the judges of these courts to six-year terms. Justices 
of the peace are elected to two-year terms. All Wiscon- 
sin judges are elected on nonpartisan ballots. That is, no 
political party labels are allowed on the ballots. 

Loco! Government. Wisconsin has 72 counties. A 
board of supervisors governs each county. The board is 
made up of elected supervisors — one from each town, 
each incorporated village, and each city ward. The 
supei-visors select one of their members as chairman. 
Other county officials include the sheriff, treasurer, 
surveyor, coroner, and district attorney. 

Wisconsin law allows cities and villages to operate 
under the mayor, manager, or commissioner form of 
government. A few cities and villages have the manager 
form. All the rest have the mayor-council form. 

Taxation. Ta.xes and licenses bring in about four- 
fifths of the state government's income. Almost all the 
rest comes from federal grants and other U.S. govern- 
ment programs. Property taxes provide about half the 
tax income. Individual and corporation income taxes 
supply almost a fourth. A selective sales tax also brings 
in nearly a fourth of the tax income. Motor-fuel taxes 
and motor-vehicle license fees are used for highway 
construction and maintenance. Hunting and fishing 
license fees are used for consei-vation programs. 

Politics. Throughout most of its history, Wisconsin 
has strongly favored the Republican party. In fact, the 



Milvnukcc Joiin 




The Executive Residence, 

home of Wisconsin's governor, 
is in Maple Bluff. The 20-room 
stone mansion, built in the 
1 920's as a private home, was 
purchased by the state in I 949, 



294 




The State Seal 



Symbols of Wisconsin. On the state seal, a sailor and a miner 
hold a shield with symbols representing Wisconsin's agriculture, 
mining, manufacturing, and navigation. The horn of plenty stands 
for prosperity, and the pyramid of pig lead symbolizes the state's 
mineral wealth. The badger represents Wisconsin's nickname — the 
Badger Stale. The seal, adopted in 1 851 , appears in the center of 
the state flog. The flag was adopted in 1913. 



Bird and flowe 



courtesy of F.Ii 



illy and Company 



party was founded in a Ripon schoolhouse in 1854. Re- 
publicans have almost always controlled the state legis- 
lature. Almost four times as many Republicans as Dem- 
ocrats have sen'ed as governor. Wisconsin voters have 
sent almost four times as many Republicans as Demo- 
crats to Congress. In presidential elections, Wisconsin 
has supported the Republican candidate about twice 
as often as the Democratic candidate. In the 1924 presi- 
dential election, Wisconsin cast its votes for a native son, 
.Senator Robert M. La FoUette, Sr., who ran unsuccess- 
fully as a Progressive. For the state's voting record in 
presidential elections since 1848, see Electoral Col- 
lege (table). 

There are signs that Wisconsin is becoming a two- 
party state. In 1958, Wisconsin voters elected Gay- 
lord A. Nelson, a Democrat, to the governorship. The 
last time a Democrat had been elected governor was in 
1932. In 1958 and in 1962, Wisconsin elected Demo- 
crats to the U.S. Senate. For the first time in the 1900's, 
Wisconsin had two Democrats in the Senate. 



The State Capitol is in Madison, which has been Wisconsin's 
capital since 1 848. Wisconsin territorial capitals were Belmont 
(1836); Burlington, now in Iowa (1837); and Madison (1838- 18481. 

Elti^ Sj\\&gt;ir. FPG 





The State Tree 

Sugar Maple 




■" ^^ Branch oV^ 




JW 


) 


o 


c 


-i 
o 









-iV 


^ 










occtof^minMiotDfoi 



Tinio^cMtcMr-HDe^f' 



— fOfOCDiniOfOCMC^CM-TlOCSI- 



nmiftt: — f 



csim-rminr^ir 



oiijocQL.ii.Q&lt;OQcocoo tiJoooujuujujQumufflcamu.u umujuOLijmooiuoaoii-oiiJii-ujQQujOQcoujQoQumijjai L.Ljii.LijmumLjfflij.uouj 

oo o ;!;':';;;:::;:!''°;° :!;;;■;: ■■oo----'---o 



JJij;--^ o 



OD_i&gt; D n -u rt— 5 E « 

.Q^*.-— &gt; S n E 



cccccccc cf ^ 



o 6 rt « SJ= «■" c 



j^j^j^„„j^j^„^ ^ ^ ^ j^(j Mnn:r:ra«rt««rtranra«rt« nj-* o 4) oj aj.-.-=._ — .-.T.:^ 000000000 = = = = 
OUaCJOaOOUtSOOXl IIIIIIXIIXXXIXXIX XIXIIIXIXXIXXIXIXXXXXIXX 



OUUJUO0li.UJOIiJ0UJO1i1OUU-0UJUUU LUU-U- &lt;0 li.OauJliJCO&lt;lj.tOli.UUi&lt;QliJlUOQOU.UJliJLJUU-LJ C0QcjOOOC0LiJli-UC0OaiUJLJUJC0QOU.Ca 



IDOO — 0100501 



__ _ _ =o-TOor--r&gt;.-TOo = 

omoocMr*.omio — fooo — QOOinT-Toioooc 



Toooirtcoo 



o (C r^ to — esi r^ co — r&gt; r^f 



CM . . . 



m oi — 



•T eo r- m w lo I 






-r fOinr^OCTJO 



i-^r-CC = 



o-a— i_ o = 



■=« = = »■- 






«"3 5 



52S!«|^EEa 



:s :a 



: = c c c^^pj:— =: = = =— » 



^DC^ICMr^C-Jln(N^C^(OlC^f')e^HOC&gt;Jrt — ■^^mM^'— ■*'*^^lO mCMtCUJP-JCO — COtMMMlft — tM"T — CliOininCM^iO^ ^IrtCSJf^ — m«3'^(D -T-t^ CM CM 

&lt;UCQlUCUauuJU.U.CO00OUUJCQOtiJU.U.U.L:&gt;OUJUJUJli. Li.mOOUJOOU.OU.OUJUOtiJUCQU&lt;Ljau.U.O Oli-UJOOUJOli-OOuOOO 



iftinto— — — fow 
I1JU.OOLUOUJU 



oioorof^oioc5(Oroif 
0000 — — r&gt;cjmtc r&gt;.r- . 
— (OCM'T — ID -&lt;ooicoico — 



■■£Us 



n. P 7; &gt;- oj S 5 ^ 



- o ° ,,. _ = 



UUUUOUUUUQOOUaOQOOaaOOQQOOaOQO OOOOOOQQOOOQODOOOOOOOUJUJLU lJUJLJUJUJLiJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJ 






.ocoiooCT)r»oio 



= I. I- o ■ . 

I- = oO o 

£j|=^EE££ 
bJ LJ LU 111 LlI UJ liJ Ul 



a 
z 



&lt; 



z 
o 

u 



Nio»TtMeN&lt;fi'rcNm — MeMCNroeMininrr'TCMM incM^cmmintDcoeoroiromfomscco — — iocnc^ — OJrom rjfO^— — ^esucrommiofoCNfOLOCN — idttt m — — ^(siP' 
d UJ Li. U 03 O CJ O U. UJ CO CQ O U. U. QQ DQ UJ UJ O UJ UJOOOOUJOUJU.OUUUJOUJUJOCQCQUJOUJOOO OOUUO UOCDUJU.OUJU.aOUOUJCaaUJ &lt;CUCQOU 



N— OOOC 



NO) eMoinoooioeooooo — ^ 
■- — ^iino -T tc t^ CT&gt; o ro ro mix 



ooo-rf oof^o-Teooir^inioeoinooc^r*. —000- 
3min(NC-i ocoeotch»r&gt;.mcoinco — co^CCTJ — to CM^oeoc- 
-. ■ cor^ CM o -pj r^eMco-TOh"CO ■ — Mrr t ■— ■ — 



&gt; o 



-4_ O C 






s-a =Q 



-■ -— i. Ml -'M_ -— *,jiOl^t-^t= l__ _ii- 

1- u 3^i;^ 2^ o-g _o S=°- £^ *i*r_^- 5 o o « 

i_i_i_i_i_i_33 = = nn«rt««n««re«"^«««fa«ra««««rt«iuaja)0£^££i:£££^ ; oooooooooo 00000 

CQCOfflCQCOCQCQCDCamuuOOUUUUUUO OUOCJUUOOOUUCiUUUUCJUUOUUUUU UUUOU UUUCJOUOOUOUUOUUCJ ouuuu 



(ocMioeoco^N (c — — -rroTiTO'TCM — — f^incMmioioicfo-^coT 
aOU.UJOUJU. uOoaujUJCQUJUUOCQ&lt;UJOOUJUJUJU.U.U. 



-tciicMcoinro — mcM»T"Tm'*'T roiocM-TTc-i •T(&gt;i-3'foroiocoio — CMCMscmcoTT — mm»i-^^it^ 

u.comu.ujou.ouoooujuj ooou.ou uju.ujuju]OujaooomujuujL.Ob.u.ouJu.uj 



~ooomocoor^o:if 



oior^ — -Tift-t — "^ 

--T - — ;D — CO(D — 



Moor»-coor^a&gt;cocotcr^-i 



F-2c 



i&gt;T3 

Z o ed w 
s I- o-a &gt; ._ 

- O^ « OJ o o 






:^rt « «r_ = ^i;:: 











roofO OfOCMin 






a&gt;(C — CO inr-^cNM 


CM 




t 


■-D 


j£^jci_ ; 




^ .CM CO .^ 

1 : ; 'd:. 


S?- = 


c~ 


Bend 
Falls 

IWOOC 

amwo 


k Cre 
k Ea 
k Ha 
k Riv 
■ Is . 
kwell 




chard 

ker 

mer 

ming 

ove* 

iiingt 

Rive 


si = £ll.?.5,iE£ 






aa^c3u.n 





■rn.PO'f f 



-TOTCMOO 



000 



-D W n o -O "^ Ol.— ^ _ _ __.___-.- ^, - .,„ ,- ^ X *^ -* ~ ~ ~ — — w w i_ i_ i_ kv. vv, i-d .u ij. &gt;._&gt;. 1- H, w w ^« u — —---------— — 

&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;cQa]mcQ mcacQcQCQCocammcacomcQmcQmcQQ3a3cacQCQ cq cocQcotacommmmmcDmcQCQ mcQEmcQca mmcacaEomcQcocQasfflcacacQmmmmfflmmm 



- o o o o o 



■trmtDCM — — »tcjio(o»tcM — *t CMin tcco eMcn»tmcMinmio»tw5 
OOUJOOUOOUUIU-UOUJUQUJO OUJC0lkOUJU.OQOO 



foin — 
QOU 



TCM^lOrr — — -q 



UQu.caau 



&gt;.&lt;£:CT&gt;r^^ — TO-1 



III 



:-T — r^.rO-TOliCCT) 



r-TOiCMO p W 

— cMfOTCi— t d) 



r^^oro^DO — T 

(Tj in ci cm' o (o CO m :o rv. CTi 



o — otooouc 



nmo(Ooioio — lOCMicoi cotoir 



-Qor C 



r motcooo) 



&lt;l&gt; = 



s=i-^^ = = = = &lt;= 



u 



&gt; ° 



■« : 




a '.V s 

on 

1. 

Center 




cm' 


"K 



s&gt;„ 



O Oj, 



:?£?- 



;E?5 



&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt; &lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt; &lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt; 



2^:eS&gt;±°eeee°£&gt;- 



000 

0)0)0)0&gt;G^C10)0&gt;OOOOCOCOCOOO 



c » 

o -s 



— — t" r..* 05 tN (o oi (« 10 .T in m' o 
r^inrt(«f)(ofrt!£&lt;7) — mr&gt;OfO 

(SIOT*T — 05tD&lt;^0'£fOOr^&lt;Ti 



C 

o 

9 o 

a » 

o i 
i &lt; 

0) 

s 



■^eocMcvupcM — lOCMfO^fo-TiniDCMCMCMin iniOfOTTTmcof^wcointDtMfo^^^D'i-m'a-ift irtMin 

QmomQouooouJUJu.ujocQOOo ujou.u.ujujcoou.uju.ouju.uuQaoujcj ujuq 






MlOCOlOTOlOtD — — o 

---r^(S — o t-T- 

M CO CO in IS o CM a 

m" co' ct) cm' lo CO -t CO cm CD — - 



i2 O c 



UI^SSKcA 



E a o.- i 03 J^ E o.^ E- a 

■0«««i_3 = !i-£JSoi-™0°0^"-- - 

&lt;&lt;cDcaaicamcjcicjcjoQQOOQUJb.u 



o ?^ S^ - &lt;- 5L— ■=:°*-c = = « o ° 
4^^^5;-j-j_i-jsssese So 



WISCONSIN 



totortcvjfo r&gt;.ioioif 



mT^"»^nT^^o^ — M&lt;ow — e^ 



fO"-f-om&lt;C oor^roo-t — t \n m os 's ir^ t 
— — — — — uioiCTj — O^enCTKn^e-wo^T- 



pjCMcofOTf — irtc^— c&gt;jin CM &lt;M m in ^ fo TT PO lo — Mmi«m(N 
iQU-UU LUGCQUOOQO U. U. UJ U. CQ O U 

o ■ ■ - 



UU-QCDCQ OLi.UJlUUJLUliJQliJQcQliJW&lt;CDOQ3LiJlU UUl UJ Ui O UJ UJ Q O 

■ • ■ o ■ ■ o o o o " : ; : : ! :** 



_ _ r^ocomof»50o 

— of^ioioo&gt; -csif 



■ in 



■5 £51 



co-T^oD— -in — coiniofo — wif 

00 — 



OQOLUUOli.Oli.OuJUL. 

fsKMcgooooooioor^oio 
o-taJOOiOT — 00 -CMr-tM ■ 









L.U. QLJQ0OIUQQ30CQQQ00UI OOQUJOH-QO Qli.QLJ LJCflDlua]ClUJUJQoOOO&lt;UJOOOOQlJ.OU.OOU.ClOUJU.QmDQCDCQlUGliJliJUJ-J 

-o o ;;;;;-■"■■■ " 

r^ ;c tD Csi lo m to f Mcoocoecr- 



^lO OCOOOTlftTr^TOTO — rO — Cl 



C01 



-to 



rso^roinm-1 



-r o mo o — h-mocNOiDOOCNmo — 
DioT — iN.aiaiCTioomr^coinocM-"'""^ 
^cNj , — tDTco 'Cvjaifo — — to 



vior^ir 



M-tc 



.CM 



= ■ BCQ r- &lt;"' ^ 






cNj— : 



f=££5rSgS.£.£,S.£.E?^. 



~C-J . — 



-rro — r&gt;-oico 






s^^^^.r- 



-I53 33 33&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;? 



— toto^coc-JCM^toro'T't^fOf 



to fo CM irt in to to rr«m — tomu) eo^to- 



esj_ focMrrrrmin — CNTt ■trco cotcio^rMntcm — ..^ — 

QUI uJOliJlUOUJOUJOOli-lUlUQUJLiJ&lt;UJaOQailU OUO ii.DQDij.00OOlilUJCDCaQQliJliJQL.OUJ UJOO&lt;0&lt;UJ 



UJU-U-UOUJO UJ0QU.O o 






3 — tcr&gt;.h»omr^ 



CM 



fet-Ss^ 



nr^ocoo c^ino 
TTinco — lo CMOco 



c^t^yj'^UJ.^oiHTJ^-SSc^'S- 

s o o o o o o o'«j«J. 






I (= in tJ5 tJ) cj i 
I — — OOt 
. ! CM — 

«orr 



(TurOOtCu 






£ e: 
re &gt;&gt;'- 



■=■= _ ' o o 
- "^ o = o o 



.CQ 



ocn , 






— "T in "T — toco CD — ID lO -T CO -T CM CD to "T m C3 CO Tf CO CM^ — &lt;DinCM T 

CDOCDOU.oCQQQOUJCQOOO&lt;&lt;QCQOUJOu. L-OOUiOCQ O 



oooooc 



T-TOTOr^Otf 



MTtClOMtDtninf CM CM TTCMtDfO — ^T 

QUJOUJU-CDoQUJO uj ljo&lt;oQcQuj 



:■= «■=&gt; 



— mcom(DCMmtococo'*coteincMcoTrTfrt 
UJ Q CD 01 U. O UJ UJ UJ CD O UJ O UJ O U. O Oo 



I'-Q &gt;'3 



™w w www^ w^ww- i°-°=&gt;'-5c _ 

ILO.tl.(LQ.Q-CLtt£Ll.tLCLQ.tLfl.ll.fl.LQ.tLfl-fl-tL tfl-tLO-O-t 



~££(££(L(££i£ttt:t i iiiiioltt. cooccccccccccqiocccccccocdcococqc 



5 ^ !5 5&gt;-2S S s '^ 7 h^^f^^ e»~---r o~i;'-= ? 



&gt; §SEo-- = =.-.- 

"c £ « ° o «o !;-r 

: c .E - ■= "^ -n »■; 



-Sia 



CO in in CO — 
UJOU-UJLlQQOQQOQuJ 



^ CMCM— — cocoTinfoin- — intDinTCM- m t — lOc^iincocMir 
UJ UJOUJ OU.QILUJUJOU. OOCQOQQU. UJ UJUJU.QQUJLI.U 

oiomooTCMC^ 



— i=in*i-. = 'is— r-^uiocRioco opoco omo CO — r». ooo cDinoooinoo 
(ooi^CMO- OTincM- ininTfto tcoco co co in to o to eo in — r^coCTjtooo 
— '^eooio- tDor-*iftCMcococo 'Cor^ • - — -t^cocmcm cO— 'O - — cm 



ICOCMC- 



_ « o^ =&gt;._ ra-= &gt; 



:-0 5;^ 



■ t=^ 2 w = ot; 

:"! = -- = =- ■ ■ ■^" 

J CI fli aa ^ ti fij C3 Qj CJ Qj CJ OJ ^ f^"^ '■-1 



TT^incMcorr'tinTfcO'*^ 



U-UQQCQoujCOQuj&lt;ujuju.u.oQQQujuju.ujoQo 



_. ^J5 — incMOTCoeooo — oi"3'0 
MoitDCM'^tDOtDTT— ■'a-CTiTfOoco — oin 
— "S-orvtoo) — — oincoocooiin - 



-JO. ° 



IZZHZZZZZ 2ZZ ZZZZZZZZ ZZZZZZZ 



= S-5 fe S fe S oo o « =" S S S5 SSS E g c = g £r S-S S S « S o S 5 o 5 

Z ZZZZZOOO 00000000000000000000-0-0-0.0.0. 



= -2*1 



(D tD^tccotDtcininri-cofM-foin&lt;MrrcoinrTtDrTfo.-ocMcoincD tn &lt;&gt;j &lt;&gt;j co tj- .ro rj- - in ^t cm &lt;o -r in c-1 - in incDCM co^CM^J=&lt;^i&lt;^^^^^ -r n- co ^ co to co rr mcortco 

Q CflUJ&lt;a5&lt;CQUJUJQQQQCflCDOUJUJUJOUJOCDOUJQ&lt; UJQUCfloQUJUJOUJOQQU.QOU. U.Uja U-OCDOQQOUJU. OUJU.U.m&lt;CQQ UJU.UJU. 

o o o ■ ■ o o ■ o :© ; ;:::::: :°. ^ : : : : : : 

oooMo o — 05o&gt; — ininr&gt;. oco — in 



MOtccomcoin^Dcv 



CO 



S S-aCDC o_t: ■ ca = ,S n 



■J CO Q (D CM r^ tD CO 
rincDO -CMCM- 



s iD^coo — — fN.r&gt;inoooooooo — 

_3 r».cMTTQiocicior^ — cMintoooors, _i — --l^ — ii - -,^^^^ .^ 

lo — CO • cMtoSr-.-SincMTr -t cm- CMtfxo tj-cocm co r-* co r- — co o -omr-co- 



coo- 
cor ■ 
-— ; CM 



^&lt;u.-a=:i * E 



C3Ca«*-atj"&gt; 



; E C C 



C C(? C C «■= EC C E C « E E C E t ""i^ = .^^ 3 3 3 

_ „— (;rec3frarert-r-rararar-raTO&lt;^TOn«ota«««&lt;i-«w— ^L-ww-^« w .._.E-= "- — .= .- OoooooOoooocsoo oO o o O 

SE SSESSS^SESSEESSSSSSSSESSSSS SSSSSSSSSE2SESSSS SEE SSEESEEES SESEEESS ESE 



oincoincDtOfoicotf 



ncoincoco — cococ 



fO — intDTtcofotoinintDincoinTr — TCDio tcmcmco — -rm cm -t m in cm co rr tc — in co 
OU.QQOUJCli.QUJQUJLi.&lt;UJODUJQ OUJOUIU.UJU. CD CJUJOCO U-CCKUJOCOUOOUJOU Q&lt;OU.LJUJUJUJOOUJOOOOOO UIUJU.&lt;UJOCDQ00 CO 
o o o - . - -o o ■ ■ ■ ■ '° '.'..'. '. 



Mtcoioi^r^cMCTJCM-rr^r^c^ 



r^ CO coco ^ CM 



^tcooocOCT:^ocooC)r&gt;.roino — toocoooo 

-om-TtD — oioooso iMCM^tcr^- — — ~.~.— . 

TincM ■ -Td - — T tDCMCOin- - 



r^COOOtOCT)Or&gt;.C 



= 3= E E r E-S S So-S E E rt 0-= 



r ■- * 3 - o E ^eOQCH !-•=:■= 25"°" 



«0 &gt;.U. G 

■3 J 

« « c= c; 






.x:x: 



: c « S i i- 

- o E « &gt; o o « 

j^!2 ® e'e e&gt; 

J_l_l-l^ UUEEEEEEE 



299 



WISCONSIN 



People 



The 1 960 United States census reported that Wiscon- 
sin had 3,951,777 persons. The population had in- 
creased 15 per cent over the 1950 figure, 3,434,575. 
The U.S. Bureau of the Census estimated that by 1965 
the state's population had reached about 4,271,000. 

About two-thirds of the people of Wisconsin live in 
cities. Almost a third live in the metropolitan area of 
Milwaukee. The state has six Standard Metropolitan 
Statistical Areas as defined by the U.S. Bureau of the 
Budget (see Metropolitan Area). For the populations 
of these metropolitan areas, see the Inde.\ to the political 
map of Wisconsin. 

Milwaukee, Wisconsin's largest city, is a leading cen- 
ter of German-American culture in the United States. 
Milwaukee began as a fur-trading center. It is now 
known for its manufacturing, its brewing industry, its 
fine restaurants, its harbor, and its spirit oi gemiitlich- 
keit (German for good fellowship). Milwaukee's leading 
industry is the manufacture of electrical equipment. 
The port of Milwaukee handles almost 7,000,000 tons 
of freight yearly. 

Madison, the state capital, is Wisconsin's second larg- 
est city. It has one of the nation's most beautiful Capi- 
tols. The granite dome of the Wisconsin Capitol towers 
almost 300 feet above Madison. Three lakes — Men- 
dota, Monona, and Wingra — lie within the city. These 
lakes help make Madison one of the loveliest capital 
cities in the countiy. The main campus of the Univer- 
sity of Wisconsin is in Madison. 

Racine, Kenosha, and Green Bay, Wisconsin's next 
largest cities, are important manufacturing and ship- 
ping centers. Superior has one of the world's largest 
iron-ore docks, and one of the nation's largest grain 
elevators. See the separate articles on the cities of Wis- 
consin listed in the Related Articles at the end of this 
article. 

About 96 of every 100 Wisconsinites were born in the 
United States. Most of those who were born in other 
lands came from Germany, Norway, Poland, Russia, 
and Yugoslavia. 

Church membership in Wisconsin is about evenly di- 
vided between the Protestant and Roman Catholic 
faiths. The largest Protestant groups include the Bap- 
tist, Evangelical United Brethren, Lutheran, and 
United Church of Christ. 

Worker in a Paper Factory inspects huge sheets of paper. 
Wisconsin produces more paper than any other state. 

Consolidated Paper! 





.nnii studios 

Cheese Maker chops the curd before pressing it into molds. Wis- 
consin produces more than 40 per cent of the nation's cheese. 




H.nrmann Sludtos 

Commercial Fishermen catch smelts as the fish spawn in spring. 
Fishing in Wisconsin's mony lakes is also popular with sportsmen. 

POPULATION 

This map shows the population density of Wisconsin, and how it 
varies in different parts of the state. Population density means 
the overage number of persons who live on each square mile. 

PERSONS PER SQUARE MILE 

5 to 25 I 25 to 50 __ 

50 100 Miles 



h 



50 100 150 Kilometers 




WORLD BOOK tnup 



Schools. Michael Frank, a newspaper editor in 
Southport (now Kenosha), led the movement for free 
schools in Wisconsin. In 1845, Southport established 
Wisconsin's first public school. The state constitution, 
adopted in 1 848, provided for a school fund to be used 
for free schooling of all children between the ages of 
4 and 20. In 1856, Mrs. Carl Schurz opened the nation's 
first kindergarten in Watertown. 

A 1911 Wisconsin law required all cities and towns 
widi populations of 5,000 or more to establish voca- 
tional schools. This was the first law of its kind in the 
United States. Today, the Milwaukee Vocational 
School is one of the largest trade schools in the United 
States. In 1891, the University of Wisconsin established 
one of the nation's first correspondence schools. Early 
in World War II, the U.S. Armed Forces Institute chose 
Madison as its headquarters because of the university's 
famed correspondence courses. The institute offered 
courses of its own and of about 80 other universities and 
colleges to all members of the anned forces. 

The superintendent of public instruction directs Wis- 
consin's public schools. He is elected to a four-year term. 
Children aged 7 to 1 6 must attend school. For informa- 
tion on the number of students and teachers in Wiscon- 
sin, see Education (table). 

Libraries. Wisconsin has more than 310 public li- 
braries and about 60 college and university libraries. 



It also has almost 20 bookmobiles that serve rural areas. 
The State Library, also known as the Law Library, was 
founded in Madison in 1836. State support for free pub- 
lic libraries began in 1872. The Wisconsin Free Library 
Commission, founded in 1895, helps small towns and 
farming areas meet their library needs. A reference li- 
brary for legislators is in the state Capitol. It was 
founded in 1901, and was the first of its kind in the 
nation. The largest libraries in the state are the Mil- 
waukee Public Library, which has 1 ,646,000 books, and 
the University of Wisconsin Library in Madison, which 
has 1,446,000 books. The State Historical Society Li- 
braiy in Madison has one of the nation's largest collec- 
tions of books, newspapers, and manuscripts on LInited 
States history. 

Museums. The Milwaukee Public Museum owns an 
outstanding collection of prehistoric Indian tools, weap- 
ons, and other items. The Instimte of Paper Chemistry 
Museum in Appleton traces the history of papermaking 
from its beginning in a.d. 105. The Stonefield Farm 
and Craft Museum in Nelson Dewey State Park near 
Cassville exhibits early farm tools. It also has model 
shops of the village blacksmith, harness maker, and 
cobbler. The State Historical Society Museum in Madi- 
son has many displays dealing with Wisconsin's early 
days. The Milwaukee Art Center features a large col- 
lection of sculptures, paintings, and etchings. 



UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES 



Name 
Alverno College 
Beloil College 
Cardinal SIritch College 
Carroll College 
Carthage College 
Dominican College 
Edgewood College of the 

Heart 
Holy Family College 
Lakeland College 
Lawrence University 
Marian College of 

Fond du Lac 
Marquette University 
Mount Mary College 



Wisconsin has 28 regionally accredi 
ments and further information, see 
Location Founded 

Milwaukee 1887 

Beloit 1846 



Sacred 



Milwaukee 
Waukesha 
Kenosha 
Racine 

Madison 
Manitowoc 
Sheboygan 
Appleton 

Fond du Lac 

Milwaukee 

Milwaukee 



1937 
1840 
1847 
1863 

1927 
1935 
1862 
1847 

1936 
1864 
1850 



ited universities and colleges. For enroll- 
UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES (table). 

Nome 
Northland College 
Ripon College 
St. Francis Seminary 
St. Norbert College 
Stout State University 
Viterbo College 
Wisconsin, University of 
Wisconsin State University 
Wisconsin State University 
Wisconsin Stale University 
Wisconsin State University 
Wisconsin State University 
Wisconsin State University 
Wisconsin State University 
Wisconsin State University 



Location 


Founded 


Ashland 


1892 


Ripon 


1851 


Milwaukee 


1856 


West De Pere 


1898 


Menomonle 


1893 


La Crosse 


1931 


Madison 


1848 


Eau Claire 


1916 


La Crosse 


1909 


Oshkosh 


1871 


River Falls 


1874 


Stevens Point 


1894 


Superior 


1896 


Whitewater 


1868 


Platteville 


1866 



Watertown Historical Society 



First U.S. Kindergarten, 

shown in a reconstruction, was 
founded by Mrs. Carl Schurz 
in Watertown in 1 856 for the 
children of German immigrants. 




WISCONSIN 



A Visitor's Guide 



Wisconsin's natural beauty has made the state a fa- 
vorite playground of the nation. Tourists spend hun- 
dreds of millions of dollars in the state every year. Vaca- 
tionists enjoy Wisconsin's sparkling lakes, rolling hills, 
quiet valleys, deep forests, and cool, pine-scented 
breezes. Hikers follow twisting trails through dark, 
beautiful woods. The thousands of lakes attract swim- 
mers and boating enthusiasts. Fishermen catch bass, 
trout, and other fish. Hunters bag beavers, deer, rab- 
bits, and game birds. Wisconsin is ideal for skiing, skat- 
ing, tobogganing, and iceboating. 

Goat Cart Ride at the Circus World Museum in Baraboo 

w illiaiJi R. Wilsun 





Willi.-un It. Wilson 

Booting on the Wisconsin River near Wisconsin Dells 



PLACES TO VISIT 



Following are brief descriptions of some of Wiscon- 
sin's many interesting places to visit. 

Apostle Islands, offshore from Bayfield, offer "deep- 
sea" fishing for huge lake trout. Anglers come from all 
parts of the country to try their luck. 

Cave of the Mounds, between Mount Horeb and 
Blue Mounds, has hundreds of colorful stone forma- 
tions. They hang from the ceiling and rise from the 
floor in the cavern's 14 rooms. 

Circus World Museum, in Baraboo, displays circus 
equipment used by the Ringling brothers, who started 
their world-famous circus in Baraboo in 1884. 

Indian Reservations in northern Wisconsin include 
the Lac Court Oreilles, Red Cliff, Bad River, and Lac 
du Flambeau. The Indians conduct dramatic cere- 
monies for visitors. 

Little Norway, near Mount Horeb, was built in 1926 
to resemble a typical Norwegian valley. The 160-acre 
tract has several pictinesque houses. Rooms in the 
houses have Scandinavian-style furnishings. Isak Dahle, 
a Chicago businessman, hired Norwegian craftsmen 
to build the tiny village. 

Museum of Woodcarving, in Spooner, has a collec- 
tion of about 400 scale-model woodcarvings, including 
a life-size work of Leonardo da Vinci's The Last Supper. 

Tallesin, near Spring Green, was the 200-acre coun- 
try estate of the famous architect Frank Lloyd Wright. 
Visitors may tour the spacious home and a school built 
by Wright to teach young architects from all parts of 
the world. 



Wisconsin Dells, in Adams and Sauk counties, is one 
of the state's most beautiful regions. The Wisconsin 
River has cut a channel seven miles long and a hun- 
dred feet deep through soft sandstone. Many weird for- 
mations have been carved out of the rock. They have 
such names as Devil's Elbow, Grand Piano, and Fat 
Man's Misery. 

Notional Forests. \Visconsin has tw'O national forests, 
both established in 1933. Chequamegon National For- 
est lies in north-central Wisconsin. It has more than 1 70 
lakes within its borders. Nicolet National Forest, in 
northeastern Wisconsin, has over 260 lakes. Both na- 
tional forests offer hunting, fishing, and skiing. For the 
areas and chief features of these national forests, see 
National Forest (table). 

In 1964, Congress approved the establishment of the 
Ice Age National Scientific Reserve in Wisconsin. The 
reserve will consist of three separate areas in southern and 
northwestern Wisconsin. The reserve is designed to pre- 
serve the features left on the land by the glaciers that 
once covered Wisconsin. The Ice Age National Scien- 
tific Reserve will be the first national site completely 
run by a state. It will also be the first one to be called a 
reserve. 

State Parks and Forests. VVisconsin has 33 state parks 
and 10 state forests. It began developing its state park 
system in 1 900. For information on the state parks and 
forests of Wisconsin, write to Wisconsin Consci-vation 
Department, Director of Forests and Parks Division, 
State Office Building, Madison, Wis. 53702. 



302 




Cave of the Mounds, Inc. 

Cave of the Mounds near Blue Mounds 



William R. Wilson 

Annual William Tell Pageant in New Glarus 



Taliesin, Frank Lloyd Wright's Home near Spring Green 

Taliosin Associated Architects 



ANNUAL EVENTS 




Little Norway, a Pioneer Homestead near Mount Horeb 




A popular annual event in Wisconsin is the crowning 
of "Alice in Dairs'land" in Madison during Dairy 
Month. Each June, a Wisconsin girl is selected from 
hundreds of candidates to reign for one year as the 
symbol of the state's main agricultural activity. Dur- 
ing the year, she makes public appearances throughout 
the United States. The annual Wisconsin State Fair, 
held in West Allis in August, features an art exhibit, 
automobile races, a horse show, and horse races. Win- 
nebago Indians perform colorful ceremonial dances at 
Wisconsin Dells every evening from July 1 to Septem- 
ber 10. 

Other annual events in Wisconsin include the fol- 
lowing. 

January-March: Amateur United States and Canada 
Ski Meet, and Amateur National Skating Competition 
between the United States and Canada, both in Ocono- 
mowoc (January); Winter Carnival in Portage and tola 
(February); Curling Matches in Centerville, La Crosse, 
Lodi, Stevens Point, Wausau, and Wauwatosa (March); 
Smelt Carnival in Marinette (March-April). 

April-June: Cheriy Blossom Week in Door County 
(May); National Musky Festival in Hayward (June). 

July-September: Frog Derby in Dousman (July); 
Bratwurst Day in Sheboygan (August); William Tell 
Pageant in New Glarus (September); Cranberry Festi- 
val in Wisconsin Rapids (September); Road America 
500 Sports Car Races in Elkhart Lake (September); 
Apple Festival in Gays Mills (September); Kraut and 
Weiner Day in Waterloo (September). 

October-December: Leif Ericson Day, state-wide (Oc- 
tober 9): Oktoberfest in La Crosse (October); Welsh 
Song Festival in Cambria (October); Christmas Tree 
Festival in Ogema (October); Wisconsin Cheese Week, 
state-wide (November-December) . 

,303 



WISCONSIN /^^^ Lond 



Wisconsin is a land of rolling hills, ridges, fertile plains 
and valleys, and beautiful lakes. A series of glaciers that 
began about a million years ago traveled over most of 
present-day Wisconsin. The glaciers scraped hilltops, 
filled in valleys, and changed most of the surface. As 
the ice melted and the glaciers wasted away, they left 
thick deposits of earth materials. These deposits blocked 
drainage of the water, causing lakes, marshes, and 
streams with falls and rapids. Glaciers do not appear to 
have touched southwestern Wisconsin. Much of this 
area is rough, with steep-sided ridges and deep valleys. 

Land Regions. Wisconsin has five major land re- 
gions. They are (1) the Lake Superior Lowland, (2) the 
Superior Upland, or Northern Highland, (3) the Cen- 
tral Plain, (4) the Western Upland, and (5) the Great 
Lakes Plains, or Eastern Ridges and Lowlands. 

The Lake Superior Lowland is a flat plain that slopes 
gently upward toward the south from Lake Superior. 
The plain ends a few miles inland at a steep cliff. 

The Superior Upland covers most of northern Wiscon- 
sin. It slopes gradually downward toward the south. 
The region is a favorite vacationland because of its 
heavily forested hills and hundreds of small lakes. 
Tim's Hill, the state's highest point, rises 1,953 feet 
above sea level in Price County. 

The Centra! Plain curves across the central part of the 
state. Glaciers covered the eastern and northwestern 
parts of this region. Much of the southern portion was 
not touched by glaciers. In this southern portion, the 
Wisconsin River has carved the scenic gorge called the 
Wisconsin Dells. 



The Western Upland is one of the most attractive parts 
of Wisconsin. Steep slopes and winding ridges, un- 
touched by glaciers, rise in the southwestern part of 
the region. Limestone and sandstone bluffs of breath- 
taking beauty stand along the Mississippi River. 

The Great Lakes Plains region extends from the Green 
Bay area southward to Illinois. Gently rolling plains of 
glacial material partly cover limestone ridges that run 
from north to south. This region is the richest agricul- 
tural section of Wisconsin. It has the state's largest 
areas of high-grade soil, and its longest growing season. 

Shoreline of Wisconsin extends 381 miles along Lake 
Michigan and 292 miles along Lake Superior. Bluffs 
and sandy beaches line the Lake Michigan shore. Lake 
Superior's shoreline also has sandy beaches, but fewer 
rugged bluffs. Wisconsin's largest ports include Ash- 
land, Green Bay, Manitowoc, Milwaukee, and Su- 
perior. 

Rivers, Waterfalls, and Lakes. An east-west divide 
cuts across northern Wisconsin. This ridge of land sepa- 
rates short rivers that enter Lake Superior — such as the 
Bad, Montreal, and Nemadji rivers — from the longer 
rivers that flow southward — such as the Flambeau and 
St. Croix. A north-south divide runs down the eastern 
third of the state. West of this divide, the rivers flow into 
the Mississippi. These rivers include the Black, Chip- 
pewa, La Crosse, St. Croix, and Wisconsin. Streams east 
of the divide empty into Lake Michigan directly or 
through Green Bay. These rivers include the Fox, Me- 
nominee, Milwaukee, Oconto, and Peshtigo. 

Wisconsin has hundreds of waterfalls. The highest is 



Land Regions of Wisconsin 



Map Index 



LAKE SUPERIOR ^.^^ 




Apostle Is A 3 

Baraboo Range E 4 

Baraboo R E 3 

Barron Hills 2 

Bayfield Ridijc B 2 

Big Eau Pleine Res. D 4 

Black R D 3 

Brule R C 5 

Caldron Falls Res. . .0 5 
Castle Rock Reservoir E 4 
Chequamegon Bay ..8 3 

Chippewa R D ? 

Door Peninsula D o 

Du Bay Reservoir ...D 4 

Eau Claire R D 2 

Flambeau Reservoir .B 3 

Flambeau R C 2 

Fox R D 5 

Green Bay D 6 

Green Lake E 5 

High Falls Reservoir C 5 
Holcombe Reservoir ..C 2 
Lac Court Oreilles . . .C 2 

La Crosse R E 3 

Lake Chippewa C 2 

Lake Geneva F 5 

Lake Koshkonong ...F 5 

Lake Mendota E 4 

Lake Michigan F 6 

Lake Pepin D t 

Lake Poygan 5 



Lake Puckaway E 4 

Lake Superior A 4 

Lake Winnebago ....D 5 

Lake Wisconsin E4 

Lake Wissota D 2 

Madeline Isl B 3 

Menominee R C 6 

Military Ridge E 3 

Mississippi R. F 3 

Niagara Cuesta D 5 

Outer Isl A 3 

Pecatonica R F 4 

Penokee Range B 3 

Peshtigo R C 5 

Petenwell Reservoir .D 4 
Rainbow Reservoir C 4 

Rib Mtn D 4 

Rock R E 5 

St. Croix R C I 

Shawano Lake D 5 

Spirit Reservoir C 4 

Stockton Isl B 3 

Superior Upland ....B 2 
The Dells (Cliffs) ...E 4 
Tim's Hill (Highest 
Point in Wisconsin) C 3 

Washington Isl C 7 

Willow Reservoir ....C4 

Wisconsin R E 3 

Wolf R D 5 



304 




1 -*- 2 -*• 4 

Especially created for World Book Encyclopedia by Rand MCNaJiy and World Book editors 



WISCONSIN 



Big Manitou Falls in Pattison State Park, in the ex- 
treme northwest. The falls, located on the Black River, 
drop more than 165 feet. 

Wisconsin has over 8,000 lakes. Lake Winnebago, the 
state's largest lake, covers 21 5 square miles. Green Lake, 
more than 237 feet deep, is the deepest lake. Other large 
natural lakes include Butte des Morts, Geneva, Kosh- 
konong, Mendota, Pepin, Poygan, Puckavvay, and 
Shawano. The chief man-made lakes include Beaver 
Dam, Castle Rock, Chippewa, Du Bay, Flambeau, 
Petenwell, Wisconsin, and Wissota. 



George P. K-)sh.TlU-k. -Tr. 



iikee Journal 





clart-ncc P. :!&gt;clmiirit. Milwaukee Journal 

Kettle Lakes Dot Wisconsin, above. Glaciers once covered 
part of the Central Plain region. After they retreated, blocks of 
buried ice that were left behind melted and formed these lakes. 

Hoistein Dairy Cattle graze in hilly pastures in southern Wis- 
consin, below. The Great Lakes Plains region is Wisconsin's richest 
dairy-farm land. It has the state's longest crop-growing season. 




Dundee Mountain, left, in Kettle Moraine State Forest is one of 
the many interesting geological formations in the Great Lakes 
Plains region. The mountain was created by a glacier. 



Thomas P. Lake 




Sparkling Water races over 

Little Falls on the Flambeau 
River. Lakes and rivers in the 
Superior Upland region attract 
thousands of vacationers to 
Wisconsin every year. 



i 



I 



WISCONSIN/^/.^^^^ 



Wisconsin usually has warm summers and long, se- 
vere winters. Lake Michigan and Lake Superior malve 
summers somewhat cooler and winters slightly milder 
along the shores. Average J anuaiy temperatures range 
from 12° F. in the northwest to 22° F. in the southeast- 
ern corner. Danbury recorded the state's lowest tem- 
perature, — 54° F., on Jan. 24, 1922. Average July tem- 
peratures range from 69° F. in the north to 73° F. in the 
south. Wisconsin Dells recorded the state's highest tem- 
perature, 114° F., on July 13, 1936. Thunderstorms oc- 
cur frequently during the summer. Annual predpilation 
(rain, melted sno%v, and other forms of moisture) aver- 
ages about 30 inches. The average annual snowfall varies 
from more than 100 inches in northern Iron County to 
about 30 inches in the southern part of the state. 




Hagt'dorn Studios 



Warm Summer Sun brings many visitors to the beaches In Penin- 
sula State Park. The park covers part of the western shore of Door 
County peninsula, one of Wisconsin's popular resort areas. 



SEASONAL TEMPERATURES 



JANUARY 



JULY 



AVERAGE OF DAItV 
LOW TEMPERATURES 



AVERAGE Of DAILY 
HIGH TEMPERATURES 



AVERAGE OF DAILY 
lOVf TEMPERATURES 



AVERAGE OF DAILY 
HIGH TEMPERATURES 




Degrees 
Centigrade 

■11 to -9' 
-1310-11 
■16 10-13 
-18 to -16^5^ 
■20 lo 16 



I 



Degrees 
Fahrenheit 
12 to 16 
8 to 12 
4 to 8 
to 4 
-4 lo 



Degrees 
Fahrenheit 
30 lo 34 
26 to 30 
22 to 26 
18 lo 22 



t I 

I 



Degrees 

Centigrade 

' 1 to I 

3to-l 

6 to -3 

8 lo -6 




Degrees 
Centigrade 
17 to 19' 
15 to 17 
12 to IS 
10 to 12 



! 1 

I 



igrees 
fohrenheit 
62 to 66 
58 to 62 
54 to 58 
50 to 54 






W Ad 


Wjkee^ 


Degrees 
Fahrenheit 


. Centigtode 


86 to 90 


H|| 


30 to 32 


82 to 86 


^1 


28 lo 30 


78 to 82 


^H 


26 to 28 


74 to 78 


^^ 


23 to 26 



AVERAGE YEARLY RAINFALL 

(INCLUDES MELTED SNOW) 



U- 



^ 







200 Miles 
300 Kilometers 



^. 





Inches 


Centimeters 




36 to 40 


H| 91 lo 102 




32 lo 36 


^H 81 lo 


Green Boy 


28 to 32 
24 to 28 


n I08I 


r 


61 to 71 




WORLD BOOK maps 





MONTHLY WEATHER 


IN MILWAUKEE AND 


GREEN BAY 








JAN 


FEB 


MAR 


APR 


MAY 


JUNE 


JULY 


AUG 


SEPT 


OCT 


NOV 


DEC 


Averoge of: 






29 


32 




53 


64 


75 


81 


79 


72 


60 


45 


33 


High Temperotures 


MILWAl 
CREEN 


IKEE 


15 


17 




36 


45 


55 


61 


61 


53 

8 


42 
8 


30 
10 


19 

10 


Low Temperotures 

Doys of Rain or Snow 


10 


9 




11 


13 


11 


9 


9 


BAY 


10 


9 




11 


12 


11 


10 


10 


9 


8 


9 


11 


Days of Roin or Snow 


25 


26 




52 


65 


75 


81 


79 


70 


58 


41 


27 


High Temperatures 






8 


9 


20 


32 


44 


54 


59 


57 


50 


39 


26 


13 


Low Temperatures 










Temperatures are p 


^en in 


degrees 


Fatu-enheit. 











Source: U.S. Weather Bureau 



306a 



WISCONSIN 



Economy 



Natural Resources of Wisconsin include rich soil, 
plentiful water, minerals, vast forests, and abundant 
plant and animal life. 

Soil. Southeastern, southern, and western Wisconsin 
are the state's best agricultural areas. These areas have 
mostly gray-brown forest soils. They also have scattered 
sections of dark prairie soils. In the north, soils are less 
fertile and often contain too much acid. 

II 'ater. Wisconsin has 1 ,449 scjuare miles of inland wa- 
ter in addition to its outlying waters of Lake Michigan 
and Lake Superior. These two Great Lakes, the Missis- 
sippi River, and some inland rivers provide inexpensive 
transportation. Wisconsin's thousands of lakes help 
make the state a popular vacationland. Rainfall is 
abundant, and little of the state's vast water resources 
is needed for irrigation. 

Minerals. Almost every Wisconsin county has large 
amounts of sand and gravel. Stone, including lime- 
stone, sandstone, and granite, is also valuable. Lime- 
stone and sandstone are found throughout the southern 
part of the state. Granite lies chiefly in the central and 
northern sections. Brown, Dunn, Fond du Lac, Mani- 
towoc, Racine, Sauk, and Waupaca counties have com- 
mercially valuable clays. Iron ore deposits are found in 
Iron County. Grant, Iowa, and Lafayette counties have 
deposits of lead and zinc. 

Forests cover almost half the state. Hardwood trees 
make up aboiu 70 per cent of the forests. Most of the 
woodlands have second-growth trees. The most valu- 
able hardwoods include ash, aspen, basswood, elm, ma- 
ple, oak, and yellow birch. Softwoods include balsam 
fir, hemlock, pine, spruce, tamarack, and white cedar. 

Other Plant Life. Blueberries, huckleberries, Juneber- 
ries, wild black currants, and other shrubs grow in parts 
of northern and central Wisconsin. Pink trailing arbu- 
tus blossoms over rocks and imder trees in early spring. 
More than 20 kinds of violets, the state flower, bloom 
in all sections. In autumn, the Wisconsin countiyside is 
a blaze of color. The red and gold tree leaves blend 
with brilliant asters, fireweeds, and goldenrods. 

Animal Life. In Wisconsin's deep forests, hunters trail 
bears, coyotes, deer, and foxes. Fur trappers snare bea- 
vers and muskrats. Badgers, Wisconsin's state animal, 
gophers, and prairie mice scurry through the under- 
brush. Other animals include chipmunks, porcupines, 
raccoons, and woodchucks. 

Wisconsin is a fisherman's delight. The northern lakes 
and streams abound with such game fish as bass, mus- 
kellunge, pickerel, pike, sturgeon, and trout. The mus- 
kellunge is the state fish. 

Hunters shoot duck, geese, jacksnipes, partridges, 
pheasants, ruff'ed grouse, and woodcocks. Loons and 
other waterfowl breed on the northern lakes. The 
marshes shelter bitterns, black terns, and coots. Other 
birds include chickadees, nuthatches, snipes, swallows, 
warblers, and wrens. The robin is Wisconsin's state bird. 
Manufacturing accounts for almost four-fifths of the 
value of all goods produced in Wisconsin. Goods man- 
ufactured in the state have a value added by manufacture 
of $5,100,000,000 yearly. This figure represents the 
value created in products by Wisconsin's industries, 
not counting such costs as materials, supplies, and fuel. 

306b 



Wisconsin's chief manufactured products, in order of 
importance, are: (1) nonelectrical machinery, (2) food 
and related products, (3) transportation equipment, 
(4) paper and related products, and (5) electrical ma- 
chinery. 

.Nonelectrical Machinery produced in Wisconsin has a 
value added of about $934,242,000 yearly. Wisconsin 
ranks high among the states in the manufacture of non- 
electrical machinery. This machinery includes engines 
and turbines, farm machinery, power cranes and other 
construction equipment, machine tools, and metalwork- 
ing machinery. Most of the factories are in the Milwau- 
kee area and in other southeastern cities. 

Food and Related Products have a value added of about 
$753,918,000 yearly. Wisconsin produces more milk 
than any other state. Its cheese factories make more 
than 40 per cent of the cheese produced in the L^nited 
States. Wisconsin also ranks high in the production of 
butter, ice cream, and evaporated and dried milk. It 
makes the nation's entire supply of malted milk pow- 
der. Plants that process daiiy products are located 
throughout most of the state. Cudahy, Green Bay, and 
Madison have large meat-packing plants. Factories in 
Green Bay, Milwaukee, and other cities can huge 
amounts of the state's vegetable and fruit crops. Wis- 
consin is a leader in canning peas, sweet corn, beets, 

PRODUCTION IN WISCONSIN 

Total yearly value of goods produced — $6,452,891,000 



MANUFACTURED 

PRODUCTS 79% 




AGRICUtTURAl 
PRODUCTS 20% 



FISH &amp; MINERAL 
PRODUCTS 1% 



Note: Manufaclurinir percentage based on value added tiy 
Other peicenlaBes leased on value of production. 



Source: Latest available U.S. Government statistics 



EMPLOYMENT IN WISCONSIN 

Average yearly number of persons employed — 1,530,t92 

Number of 
Employees 

Manufacturing jt ii t ^ i ^ ^ 472,400 

Agriculture i i ^ ^ 266,000 

Wholesale &amp; Retail Trade ^ ^ ^ J 250,600 

Government jt jt &lt; 182,900 

Services j( \ ] 158,800 

Tronsportation &amp; Public Utilities % 72,700 

Construction f. 61,000 

Finance, Insuronce 8, Real Estate f 48,800 

1 6,992 



Fishing, Forestry &amp; Mining 1 



Source; Employment statistics supplied by employers to government 
agencies 



FARM, MINERAL, 
AND FOREST PRODUCTS 

This map shows where the states 
leading farm, mineral, and for- 
est products are produced. The 
major urban areas (shown on 
the map in red) are the state's 
important manufacturing centers. 



Fur 



Ooiry 
Products 



lOCi Kilometers 



WORLD BOOK map 



snap beans, lima beans, cranberries, and sour cherries. 
Wisconsin brews more beer than any other state. The 
laigest breweries are in Milwaulcee, which has been 
nicknamed the Beer Capital of the United States. 

Transportation Equipment produced in Wisconsin has 
a value added of about $631,313,000 annually. Wis- 
consin is one of the nation's chief automobile-manufac- 
turing states. Big automotive plants include those in 
Janesville, Kenosha, and Milwaukee. Manitowoc, .Stur- 
geon Bay, Superior, and other cities build ships and 
pleasure boats. Wisconsin plants also produce light air- 
craft and aircraft parts, railroad equipment, and house 
trailers. One of the world's largest motorcycle plants is 
in Milwaukee. 

Paper and Related Products have a value added of 
about 8490,669,000 yearly. The leading paper-produc- 
ing areas are in the Fox River Valley and the upper Wis- 
consin River Valley. Wisconsin mills produce an enor- 
mous amoimt of paper. Wisconsin leads the nation in 
the value of paper production. Mills also turn out paper 
boxes, tissue paper, heavy wrapping paper, and other 
items. 

Electrical Machinery production is growing rapidly in 
Wisconsin. Output has a value added of about S476,- 
41 1 ,000 annually. Most factories that manufacture elec- 
trical machineiy are in Milwaukee and other cities 
along Lake Michigan. Electrical machinery produced 
in Wisconsin includes household appliances, electric 
motors, and radio and television sets. 

Other Important Industries include the manufacture of 
athletic and sporting goods, chemicals and related prod- 
ucts, clothing, furniture, leather, plumbing ware, rubber 
products, shoes, toys, and pens. 

Lumbermen began logging the great Wisconsin for- 
ests in the 1830's. By 1870, lumbering had become an 
important industry in Wisconsin. Today, the state pro- 
duces about 400,000,000 board feet of timber yearly. 
Hardwoods — especially aspen, basswood, elm, oak, 
maple, and yellow birch — account for more than 70 per 
cent of the limber cut annually. Softwoods cut by \Vis- 




I7f 



«B&gt; jlS DotTy Oils 

Doiry T V i \/Sugar 
Producls Bofleyy .^» Bells 

V ''°'''"'' 'Veg.lobles 

Poultry hbV P 



Gropes V^ , 
Tobacco fl^V Poultry 
Beef 



Beef Cottle 



„ Poultry m^ LJ 

VMM * rr Sond'ond 

- !^^ , i^L Beef Conle Grovel 
,„|„y Be^Cottle fs. DoirylipB 

ll| ^^V-getobl|i p,odutti'^ 

' m, 



Cinle imillli |f °' Tobbcco 

Ooiry VC or n 
Proaucli 



Sheep 

M^°^'^="_poir,y^ 



Milwaukee 



Oots Lead , 



Hoy 



IVe&lt; 



Nursery AM Rocine 
Products ^ 



-, . , Cori« Kenosha 

Vegetables 



consin loggers include balscim fir, hemlock, pine, spruce, 
and white cedar. 

Agriculture. Wisconsin's farm income totals about 
$1 ,283,000,000 yearly. This is about a fifth of the value 
of all goods produced in the state. Wisconsin has more 
than 131,000 farms. They average about 160 acres in 
size. Wisconsin farms cover a total of about 21,1 56,000 
acres. 

Dair)'ing is die most important t&gt;'pe of farming in 
Wisconsin. The dairy industry started about 1870. It 
was encouraged through the efforts of many men, espe- 
cially William Dempster Hoard. Hoard helped organize 
the Wisconsin Dair&gt;'men's Association in 1872. The as- 
sociation did much to improve and promote Wisconsin 
dairy products. Later, it urged farmers to work together 
and to market their products cooperatively. Today, 
about a tenth of all farm cooperatives in the United 
States are in Wisconsin (see Cooperative). 

Dairy Products provide the chief source of farm in- 
come. They account for about $603,571,000 yearly. 
Since about 1912, Wisconsin has led the nation in the 
value of dairy products. The state has more than 2,100,- 
000 milk cows. They produce about 18,299,000,000 
pounds of milk yearly. 

Meat Animals account for about $270,613,000 annu- 
ally in farm income. Wisconsin raises increasing num- 
bers of beef cattle and hogs. Most of these animals are 
sent to meat-packing plants in Cudahy, Green Bay, 
and Madison. 

Field Crops. Farmers in all regions of the state raise hay 
for livestock feed. Wisconsin ranks first among the states 



306c 



WISCONSIN 



in hay production. Corn is fed to hogs, and oats and 
corn are fed to cattle. Minor field crops include barley, 
rye, soybeans, and wheat. 

Vegetables and Fruits. Wisconsin leads the states in the 
production, for canning, of green peas and sweet corn. 
Wisconsin is also a chief producer of beets, cabbages, 
lima beans, and snap beans. Carrots, cucumbers, on- 
ions, and potatoes are other important vegetables. Cher- 
ries and apples thrive in Door County. Wisconsin farm- 
ers also raise raspberries, strawberries, and other small 
fruits. Only Massachusetts grows more cranberries than 
Wisconsin. 

Other Farm Products include poultry and eggs. Some 
Wisconsin farmers keep honeybees. Wisconsin is one of 
the nation's leading producers of honey. Farmers also 
sell beeswa.x for use in making candles, lipstick, and 
other items. Wisconsin has many mink ranches and 
raises more minks than any other state. 

Mining. Wisconsin produced about half the country's 
lead in the mid-1800's. Today, sand and gravel produc- 
tion is Wisconsin's most valuable mining activity. The 
state also produces basalt, granite, lime, limestone, 
sandstone, and quartzite. Iron ore is mined in Iron 
County. Other minerals include clay, lead, marl, peat, 
shale, and zinc. 

Fishing Industry. Every year, commercial fishermen 
catch about 30,000,000 pounds of fish in Wisconsin wa- 
ters. The chief kinds of fishes include alewives, carp, 
chubs, lake herring, and perch. 

Electric Power. Coal and other fuels produce about 
90 per cent of the state's electric power. Hydroelectric 
plants generate the rest. Wisconsin's largest power 
plants are near coal docks along Lake Michigan and 
the Mississippi River. One of the first hydroelectric 
power plants in the United States was built in Appleton 
on the Fox River in 1882. For Wisconsin's kilowatt- 
hour production, see Electric Power (table). 

Transportation. Many of Wisconsin's first settlers 
traveled up the Mississippi River in flat-bottomed boats 
called bateaia. Later settlers came by steamboat up the 
Mississippi, by ship on Lake Michigan, and overland 
by wagon. Mississippi River traffic declined with the 
growth of railroads. Great Lakes transportation in- 



creased following the opening of the St. LawTence 
Seaway in 1959. 

The first railroad in Wisconsin was opened in 1851. 
It ran between Milwaukee and Waukesha, a distance 
of about 20 miles. Today, more than 6,000 miles of 
railway track cross the state. Airlines serve Green Bay, 
Madison, Milwaukee, and other large cities. Wisconsin 
has more than 1 70 airports and several seaplane bases. 

Wisconsin has about 99,000 miles of roads and high- 
ways. More than 90 per cent of them are paved. In 
1917, Wisconsin became the first state to adopt the 
number system for marking highways. Other states 
soon adopted the system. 

The opening of the St. Lawrence Seaway spurred 
overseas trade in Wisconsin port cities. Milwaukee, a 
major Great Lakes port, exports dairy products, flour, 
grain, iron and steel scrap, machinery, and other prod- 
ucts. Ocean-going ships also dock at Green Bay, Ke- 
nosha, Manitowoc, Sheboygan, and Superior. Green 
Bay, Milwaukee, and Superior receive and distribute 
much of the coal used in Wisconsin and Minnesota. A 
car ferry service operates across Lake Michigan between 
the Wisconsin cities of Kewaunee, Manitowoc, and Mil- 
waukee, and the Michigan cities of Frankfort, Luding- 
ton, and Muskegon. A canal at Sturgeon Bay connects 
Green Bay and Lake Michigan. 

Communication. Wisconsin's first newspaper, the 
Green-Bay Intelligencer, was founded in 1833. Today, 
Wisconsin publishers issue about 325 newspapers, of 
which almost 40 are dailies. Daily newspapers with the 
largest circulations include the Capital Times of Madi- 
son, the Milwaukee Journal, the Milwaukee Sentinel, and 
the Jl'isconsin State Journal of Madison. Wisconsin pub- 
lishers also issue more than 1 50 periodicals. 

In 1853, the Wisconsin Press Association was 
founded. This organization, which collects and dis- 
tributes news among member newspapers, was the na- 
tion's first state news service. Today, the association 
has a membership of about 240 weekly papers. 

The history of radio in Wisconsin dates from 1909. 
That year, University of Wisconsin scientists conducted 
wireless experiments. The university station was licensed 
as 9XM in 1916, and became WHA in 1922. The 
state's first television station, WTMJ-TV, started 
broadcasting from Milwaukee in 1947. Wisconsin now 
has 100 radio stations and 14 television stations. 



WISCONSIN 



History 



Indian Days. The Winnebago, Dakota, and Me- 
nominee Indians lived in the Wisconsin region when the 
first white explorers came in the early 1600"s. These In- 
dians were skilled craftsmen. They lived in lodges made 
of bark, saplings, and rushes. They fished and hunted, 
and grew corn, beans, and squash. The Winnebago 
lived in the area between Green Bay and Lake Winne- 
bago. The Dakota made their home in the northwest. 
The Menominee lived west and north of Green Bay. 

Many other tribes moved into the Wisconsin area dur- 
ing the later 1600's. Some had been driven from their 
eastern homes by white inen. Others fled into the region 
to escape the warring Iroquois nation. The Chippewa 
came from the northeast and settled along the southern 
shore of Lake Superior. Other tribes came from the 

3o6d 



Michigan region. The Sauk settled west of Green Bay, 
the Fox along the Fox River, and the Ottawa along the 
southern shore of Lake Superior. The Kickapoo made 
their home in the south-central area, and the Huron in 
the northwestern section. Bands of Miami and Illinois 
Indians spread along the upper Fox River. The Pota- 
watomi camped in what is now Door County. See In- 
Di.^N, American (table, Indian Tribes). 

Exploration and Settlement. In 1634, the French ex- 
plorer Jean Nicolet became the first white man to set 
foot in the Wisconsin region. He landed on the shore of 
Green Bay while seeking a water route to China. Nico- 
let stepped ashore wearing a colorful robe and firing two 
pistols. He was disappointed when Winnebago Indians, 
not Chinese officials, greeted him. Nicolet returned to 




Mothefs' Pensions 
1913 



Workmen's Compensation 
19111 Teachers' Pensions 

lum-Woge Laws 
1913 



HISTORIC 
WISCONSIN 



%r 



Old-Age Pensions 
1931 



Unemployment Compensation 
1932 



Jean Nicolet, the first explorer to 
enter Wisconsin, landed at Green Bay 
in 1634 while seeking a Northwest 
Passage to China. He put on a man- 
darin robe to greet the "Chinese." 



B, 



Pioneer in Social Reform. 

Some of the laws passed by 
Wisconsin since 1911 were in 
force before other states or 
the nation took similar action. 






First Hydroelectric Plant in the 

nation was built at the rapids of 
th^ Fox River in Appleton in 1 882. 



wrh 



The Republican Party Was Formed 

at Ripon in February, 1 854. It received 
its name at Jackson, Mich., in July. 



Green Boy • 



Appleton • 




Ripon • 




Borofaoo 



Nation's First Kindergarten was begun 
by Mrs. Carl Sctiurz at Watertawn in 
1856. German-speaking cliildren attended. 



Woterlown • 



Milwoukee 



RInglIng Brothers created 
"Big Top" excitement at Baro- 
boo, when they started their 
first circus there in 1 884. 



it MADISON 



;s*a'-^ 





Dairyland of the Nation. Cheese mak- 
ing was introduced commercially in Wiscon- 
sin by settlers from New York. The Swiss immi- 
grants who settled New Glcrus in 1 845 also 
helped develop the Wisconsin dairy industry. 



Invention of Typewriter. 

Christopher Sholes, Carlos 
Glidden, and Samuel Soule, of 
Milwaukee, designed the first 
practical typewriter in 1 867. 



WISCONSIN 



New Fiance (Quebec), and reported that America was 
far vaster than anyone had imagined. 

About 20 years later, Pierre Esprit Radisson and 
Medart Chouart, Sieur de Groseilliers, explored the 
Wisconsin area while searching for furs. The first mis- 
sionary to the Wisconsin Indians, Father Rene Menard, 
arrived about 1660. He established a Roman Catholic 
mission near present-day Ashland. Father Claude Jean 
Allouez came to Wisconsin about 1 665 and set up sev- 
eral missions. With the help of Father Louis Andre, he 
established a center for missionary work on the site of 
present-day De Pere. Other French explorers and mis- 
sionaries who visited the area included Louis Joliet, 
Father Jacques Marquette, and Robert Cavelier, Sieur 
de la Salle. 

Struggle for Control. From the time of Nicolet's visit, 
the French had friendly relations with most of the Wis- 
consin Indian tribes. But in 1 712, a long war broke out 
between the French and the Fox Indians. Both wanted 
control of the Fox and Wisconsin rivers, the region's 
chief water route. After many bloody battles, the French 
finally defeated the Fox in 1 740. But the long war had 
weakened France's defenses in the region. France also 
lost the friendship of many former Indian allies. 

In 1 754, the French and Indian War began. This war 
was fought between Great Britain and France over rival 
claims in America. Britain won the war. Under the 
terms of the 1 763 Treaty of Paris, France lost Canada 



IMPORTANT DATES IN WISCONSIN 



1634 Jean NIcolet, a French explorer, landed on the Green 

Bay shore. 
c. 1670 Fathers Claude Jean Allouez and Louis Andre founded 

a missionary center ot De Pere. 
1673 Louis Joliet and Father Jacques Morquette traveled 

through the Wisconsin region. 
1740 The French defeated the Fox Indians. 
1763 England received the Wisconsin region from France under 

terms of the Treaty of Paris. 
1783 Wisconsin became port of the United States. 
1836 Congress created the Wisconsin Territory. 
1848 Wisconsin became the 30th state on May 29. 
1854 The Republican party was founded in Ripon. 

1871 More than a thousand persons were killed in the Peshtigo 
forest fire. 

1872 William D. Hoard and others organized the Wisconsin 
Dairymen's Association. 

1901 Robert M. Lo Follette, Sr., became governor, and the 
Progressive era began. 

191 1 The state legislature set up a teachers' pension, estab- 
lished o commission to settle labor disputes, and passed 
other progressive legislation. 

1924 Robert M. La Follette, Sr., was defeated as the Progres- 
sive party candidate for U.S. President. 

1932 Wisconsin passed the first state unemployment-compen- 
sation act. 

1958 Wisconsin voters elected their first Democratic governor* 
Gaylord Nelson, since 1 932. 

1962 The longest labor strike in Wisconsin's history, at the 
Kohler Company in Kohler, ended after eight years. 

1964 Wisconsin became the first state to have its legislative 
districts reapportioned by its supreme court. 



and all its possessions east of the Mississippi River. Con- 
trol of the Wisconsin region thus passed to the British. 
See French and Indian Wars (The French and Indian 
War). 

English fur traders took over the fur-trading posts of 
the French. In 1 774, the British passed the Quebec Act. 
Under this act, Wisconsin became part of the province 
of Quebec. The Quebec Act was one of the causes of the 
revolt by the American colonies against Britain in 1 775. 
The 1 783 Treaty of Paris ended the American Revolu- 
tionary War. LInder the treaty, Britain gave up all its 
territory east of the Mississippi and south of the Great 
Lakes. The Wisconsin region then became part of the 
L'nited States. 

Territorial Days. Wisconsin formed part of the Indi- 
ana Territory from 1800 to 1809, part of the Illinois 
Territory from 1809 to 1818, and part of the Michigan 
Territory from 1818 to 1836. Settlement of southwest- 
ern Wisconsin began during the 1820's. This region had 
rich deposits of lead ore. In the 1820's, the demand for 
lead for use in making paint and shot rose sharply. Lead 
miners from nearby states and territories poured into the 
region, and the population boomed. Some of the min- 
ers lived in shelters they dug out of the hillsides. These 
miners were nicknamed Badgers^ which, in time, became 
the nickname of all Wisconsinites. 

The Indians made their last stand in Wisconsin 
against the white man in the Black Hawk War of 1832. 
The Sauk Indians of northwestern Illinois had been 
pushed across the Mississippi River into Iowa by the 
arrival of white settlers. Black Hawk, a Sauk leader, 
wanted to return to his homeland and grow corn. In 
April, 1832, he led a thousand Indians back across the 
Mississippi. The white settlers panicked, and volun- 
teer militiamen and regular troops were called out. The 
Indians retreated into Wisconsin, where several bloody 
battles were fought. When the war ended in .'\ugust, 
only about 150 of Black Hawk's people were left. 

On April 20, 1836, Congress created the Wisconsin 
Territory. The territorial legislature met temporarily in 
Belmont and later in Burlington (now in Iowa). The 
first meeting in Madison, the capital of the territory and 
later of the state, took place in 1838. The Wisconsin 
Territory included parts of present-day Minnesota, 
Iowa, and North and South Dakota. President Andrew 
Jackson appointed Henry Dodge as the first territorial 
governor. Congress created the Iowa Territory in 1838. 
Wisconsin's western boundary then became the Missis- 
sippi River, with a northward extension to Lake of the 
Woods in present-day Minnesota. About a third of the 
present state of Minnesota remained part of Wisconsin 
until 1848. 

Statehood. Wisconsin joined the Union as the 30th 
state on May 29, 1848. Its boundaries were set as they 
are today. The people had already approved a constitu- 
tion. They elected Nelson Dewey, a Democrat, as the 
first governor. In 1840, 30,945 white persons lived in 
Wisconsin. By 1850, the population had soared to 305,- 
391. Newcomers came from other parts of the United 
States and from other countries. All saw opportunities 
for a better life in frontier Wisconsin. 

In 1854, Wisconsin citizens became aroused over the 
introduction of the Kansas-Nebraska Bill in Congress. 
I'his bill was designed to allow the new territories of 
Kansas and Nebraska to decide for themselves whether 



3o6f 



they wished to permit slavery. Most Wisconsinites op- 
posed slavery and did not want it extended to new terri- 
tories. A group of Wisconsinites held a protest meeting 
against the bill in Ripon in February, 1854. The group 
met again in March and formed the Republican party. 
Congress passed the Kansa.s-Nebraska Bill on May 25, 
1 854. See Kansas-Nebr.^ska Act. 

The Republican party quickly became a powerful 
force in the North. In 1856, Wisconsin elected its first 
Republican governor. Coles Bashford. For the next hun- 
dred years, except for brief periods, the Republicans 
controlled the state government. 

During the Civil War (1861-1865), Wisconsin gen- 
erals at various times commanded the Iron Brigade, one 
of the Union's outstanding fighting groups. The brigade 
consisted largely of Wisconsin regiments. 

In 1871, Wisconsin was struck by the worst natural 
disaster in its history — the great Peshtigo forest fire. The 
summer and fall of 1871 were extremely dry, and many 
smell fires broke out at various places in northeastern 
Wisconsin. Then, on the night of October 8, northeast- 
ern Wisconsin erupted in flame. The fire wiped out the 
town of Peshtigo and several villages. Over a thousand 
persons were killed — more than three times the number 
killed in the Great Chicago Fire that same night. The 
fire destroyed more than $5,000,000 worth of property. 

The Progressive Era. During the 1890's, a split de- 
veloped in the Republican party in Wisconsin. The 
party had been controlled by political bosses who repre- 
sented lumber and railroad interests. Robert M. La 
FoUette, Sr., a Madison lawyer and former U.S. Con- 
gressman, began to lead a movement to overthrow the 
rule by bosses. 

La FoUette won the Wisconsin governorship in 1 900. 



WISCONSIN 



He was re-elected in 1902 and 1904. Under "Battling 
Bob," the state made important social, political, and 
economic reforms. La FoUette's program was called 
Progressivism. La FoUette set up a "brain trust" of Uni- 
versity of Wisconsin professors and experts on govern- 
ment to advise him on state problems. The brain trust 
was part of the "Wisconsin Idea." This was the theory 
that the state should be served by its best minds and its 
best experts in legislation and administration. Measures 
adopted under La FoUette included an inheritance tax, 
a railroad property ta.x, regulation of railroad rates and 
sei"vice, and a direct primary law (see Prim.^ry Elec- 
tion). La FoUette entered the U.S. Senate in 1906 and 
served there until 1925. See La Follette (Robert 
Marion La Follette, Sr.). 

In 1911, Wisconsin established a commission to setde 
labor disputes and to enforce labor laws. That same 
year, the legislature set up a teachers' pension. It also 
passed a workmen's compensation law and model laws 
for the incorporation of cooperatives. Minimum-wage 
laws for women and minors, and pensions for mothers 
were adopted in 1913. In 1921, Wisconsin granted full 
civil and property rights to women. 

In 1 924, La Follette ran for President as the Progres- 
sive party candidate. President Calvin Coolidge, a Re- 
publican, won the election. La Follette received the 
electoral votes of only one state — Wisconsin. But he got 
almost 5,000,000 popular votes. La Follette died in 
1925, and his eldest son, Robert, Jr., was elected to fill 
his Senate seat. Young La Follette served in the Senate 
for 21 years. 



Wisconsin's First Capitol, iefi, was in Belmont. The 
territorial legislature met in this building for a 46-day 
session in 1836 to decide on a permanent capital. 




state Historical .Society of Wisconsin 



iral Society of Wii 



The Treaty of Butte des Morts was signed on this 
site in Winnebago County on Aug. 11,1 827. The treaty 
adjusted the boundaries of the territories of the Chip- 
pewa, Menominee, and Winnebago Indians in Wisconsin. 




3o6g 



WISCONSIN 



The 1930's to the 1960's. In 1930, Philip F. La 
FoUcttc, the youngest son of Robert M. La Follette, St., 
was elected governor. La Follette, a Republican, lost 
the governorship in 1932. But he was re-elected in 1934 
and 1936 as a Progressive. Much of the legislation en- 
acted under La Follette sought to relieve the suffering 
caused by the Great Depression of the 1930's. In 1932, 
under his administration, the first state unemployment- 
compensation act was passed. 

In the spring of 1938, La Follette tried to organize a 
new national third party, the National Progressives of 
America. But he won little support. The voters rejected 
La Follette in 1938 and elected Julius P. Heil, a Re- 
publican, to the governorship. Heil devoted himself to 
cutting costs of government. He did away with many 
agencies that La Follette had set up. Heil was re-elected 
in 1940. 

World War II (1939-1945) brought fame to several 
military leaders who had been born or reared in Wis- 
consin. General Douglas MacArthur, Allied com- 
mander in the South Pacific, lived in Milwaukee as a 
youth. Lieutenant General Nathan F. Twining, com- 
mander of U.S. air operations in the Mediterranean and 
Pacific, was born in Monroe. Fleet Admiral William D. 
Leahy, chief of staff to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, 
grew up in Ashland. Vice-Admiral Marc A. Mitscher, 
commander of the famous Task Force 58 in the Pacific, 
was born in Hillsboro. Major Richard I. Bong, who shot 
down 40 Japanese planes and became the leading U.S. 
war ace, was a native of Poplar. 

After 21 years in the U.S. Senate, Robert M. La Fol- 
lette, Jr., lost the 1946 Republican primary. Joseph R. 
McCarthy defeated him. McCarthy was elected to the 
Senate thai year and became one of the most controver- 
sial figures in American politics. See McCarth\', 
Joseph R. 

In 1954, the longest labor strike in Wisconsin's in- 
dustrial history began in Kohler at the Kohler Com- 
pany, a manufacturer of plumbing fixtures. Some work- 
ers favored the strike. Others opposed it. Fathers, sons, 
and brothers turned against one another. Friendships 
of many years were broken. Violence and bloodshed 
marked the strike, which finally ended in 1962. 

Wisconsin Today. Like many states, Wisconsin faces 
financial problems. The need for more money for educa- 
tion, public welfare, and other programs has required 
Wisconsin to increase taxes continually. But the state's 
economic growth has failed to keep pace with the 
mounting taxes. Since 1 950, state and local tax collec- 
tions have risen about 160 per cent. But the value of 
taxable property has increased only about 130 per cent, 
and the personal income of Wisconsinites has gone up 
only about 85 per cent. 

To help meet the costs of state government opera- 
tions, the legislature passed Wisconsin's first sales tax in 
1961. In 1963, as the cost of government continued to 
rise, the number of items covered by the sales tax was 
increased. 

Wisconsin's financial problems have resulted partly 
from the state's declining farm economy. Low market 
prices for milk, and heavy imports of beef from other 
countries have hurt agriculture in Wisconsin. Changes 



in the American diet, with emphasis on low-calorie 
foods, have lessened the demand for dairy products. 

The state's rate of growth in manufacturing has 
lagged behind the national rate. The increased use of 
agricultural machinery has reduced the number of 
workers on Wisconsin farms. More and more farmwork- 
ers are moving to cities, further increasing the need for 
greater industrial expansion. 

Politically, Wisconsin shows signs of becoming a two- 
party state. In 1958, after 26 years of Republican or 
Progressive control of the state government, Democrat 
Gaylord A. Nelson won the governorship. Nelson was 
re-elected in 1960. In 1962, Nelson ran for the U.S. 
Senate. He defeated Republican Alexander Wiley, who 
had been a Senator since 1939. In the 1962 election, 
Wisconsin voters elected another Democrat, John W. 
Reynolds, as governor. But in 1964, the unpredictable 
Wisconsin voters returned the governorship to a Re- 
publican, Warren P. Knowles. They elected a Demo- 
cratic lieutenant governor, Patrick J. Lucey. Also in 
1964, Wisconsin voters again elected a La Follette to 
office. They elected Bronson La Follette, grandson of 
Robert M. La Follette, Sr., as attorney general. 

In the 1960's, Governors Nelson and Reynolds bat- 
tled with their Republican legislatures over reapportion- 
ment (redivision) of the state's congressional and legis- 
lative districts. The state constitution requires that these 
districts be reapportioned every 10 years, if necessary, to 
reflect changes in population. Both Nelson and Rey- 
nolds vetoed reapportionment bills passed by the legis- 





inC V7WVCRI&gt;IWK9 \J 


Parly 


Term 


1. 


Nelson Dewey 


Democratic 


1848-1852 


2. 


Leonard J. Forwell 


Whig 


1852-1854 


3. 


William A. Barstow 


Democratic 


1854-1856 


4. 


Arthur MacArthur 


Democratic 


1856 


5. 


Coles Bashford 


Republican 


1856-1858 


6. 


Alexander W. Randall 


Republican 


1858-1862 


7. 


Louis P. Harvey 


Republican 


1862 


8. 


Edward Salomon 


Republican 


1862-1864 


9. 


James T. Lewis 


Republican 


1864-1866 


10. 


Lucius Fairchild 


Republican 


1866-1872 


11. 


Cadwallader C. Washburn 


Republican 


1872-1874 


12. 


William R. Taylor 


Democratic 


1874-1876 


13. 


Harrison Ludington 


Republican 


1876-1878 


14. 


William E. Smith 


Republican 


1878-1882 


15. 


Jeremiah McLain Rusk 


Republican 


1882-1889 


16. 


William D. Hoard 


Republican 


1889-1891 


17. 


George W. Peck 


Democratic 


1891-1895 


18. 


William H. Upham 


Republican 


1895-1897 


19. 


Edward Scofield 


Republican 


1897-1901 


20. 


Robert M. La Follette. Sr. 


Republican 


1901-1906 


21. 


James O. Davidson 


Republican 


1906-1911 


22. 


Francis E. McGovern 


Republican 


1911-1915 


23. 


Emanuel L. Philipp 


Republican 


1915-1921 


24. 


John J. Blaine 


Republican 


1921-1927 


25. 


Fred R. Zimmerman 


Republican 


1927-1929 


26. 


Walter J. Kohler, Sr. 


Republican 


1929-1931 


27. 


Philip F. La Follette 


Republican 


1931-1933 


28. 


Albert G. Schmedemon 


Democratic 


1933-1935 


29. 


Philip F. La Follette 


Progressive 


1935-1939 


30. 


Julius P. Heil 


Republican 


1939-1943 


31. 


Walter S. Goodland 


Republican 


1943-1947 


32. 


Oscar Rennebohm 


Republican 


1947-1951 


33. 


Walter J. Kohler, Jr. 


Republican 


1951-1957 


34 


Vernon W. Thomson 


Republican 


1957-1959 


35 


Gaylord A. Nelson 


Democratic 


1959-1963 


36 


John W. Reynolds 


Democratic 


1963-1965 


37 


Warren P. Knowles 


Republican 


1965- 



3o6h 



lature. The governors declared that the districts were 
not made equal in terms of population. In 1963, the 
legislature passed a bill reapportioning the state's 10 
congressional districts. Reynolds signed this bill. But he 
and the legislature could not agree on a bill for the 
state's legislative districts. Finally, in May, 1964, the 
Wisconsin supreme court drew up its own plan. This 



WISCONSIN 



Study Aids 



WISCONSIN 



was the first time that any state supreme court had re- 
apportioned a state legislature. The court's plan applied 
to the 1964 elections, and could be changed by future 

legislatures. Robert W. FiNLEY, Lawrence H. Fitzpatrick, 

and Eric Edwin Lampard 



RelQted Articles in World Book include: 



Biographies 



AUis, Edward P. 
Andrews, Roy Chapman 
Babcock, Stephen M. 
Berger, Victor L. 
Ferber, Edna 
Gronouski, John A. 
Joliet, Louis 
La Follette (family) 
Lunt, Alfred 
Marquette, Jacques 
McCarthy, Joseph R. 

Cities 

Green Bay Madison Racine 

Kenosha Milwaukee Sheboygan 

La Crosse Oshkosh Superior 



Meyer, Albert Cardinal 
Mitscher, Marc A. 
Nicolet. Jean 
Schurz (family) 
Turner, Frederick J. 
Twining, Nathan F. 
Vandcnberg, Hoyt S. 
Welles, Orson 
Wilder, Thornton N. 
Wright Frank Lloyd 



Wauwatosa 
West Allis 



History 



Northwest Territory 
Pioneer Life 



Republican Party 
Winnebago Indians 



Dalles 
Great Lakes 
Green Bay 



Physical Features 

Lake Winnebago 
Mississippi River 

Products 



Rock River 
Wisconsin River 



For Wisconsin's rank among the states, see: 
Automobile Cheese Leather Paper 

Alfalfa Cherry Milk Pea 

Building Stone Honey Oats Vegetable 

Cattle 

Other Related Articles 
Barn (picture) Cooperative Midwestern States 





Outline 




1. 


Government 








A. Constitution 




E. Local Government 




B. Executive 




F. Taxation 




C. Legislature 




G. Politics 




D Courts 






II. 


People 






III. 


Education 

A. Schools 

B. Libraries 

C. Museums 






IV. 


A Visitor's Guide 

A. Places to Visit 

B. Annual Events 






V. 


The Land 

A. Land Regions 

B. Shoreline 








C. Rivers, Waterfalls, 


and Lakes 


VI. 


Climate 






VII. 


Economy 








A. Natural Resources 




E. Fishing Industry 




B. Manufacturing 




F. Electric Power 




C. Agriculture 




G. Transportation 




D. Mining 




H. Communication 


VIII. 


History 







Questions 

What was the greatest natural disaster in Wisconsin's 
history? 

How many state constitutions has Wisconsin had? 

How long has Wisconsin led the nation in the pro- 
duction of dairy products? 

How did Wisconsin get the nickname the Badget State? 

In what Wisconsin city was the Republican party 
founded? 

What was the "Wisconsin Idea"? 

What are Devil's Elbow, Grand Piano, and Fat Man's 
Misery? 

Why was Jean Nicolet disappointed when he landed 
on the Green Bay shore in 1634? 

Who is "Alice in Dairyland"? 

What are some of the reforms Wisconsin began that 
other states later adopted? 

Books for Young Readers 

Bailey, Bernadine F. Picture Book oj Wiscomm. Whitman, 
195L 

Brink, Carol R. Caddie Woodlawn. Macmillan, 1935. 

Carpenter, Allan. Wisconsin. Children's Press, 1964. 

Henderson, Margaret G., and others. // Happened Here: 
Stories oJ Wisconsin. State Historical Society of Wis- 
consin, 1949. 

Platt, Doris H., ed. Wisconsin Reader. State Historical 
Society of Wisconsin, 1960. A selection of articles from 
the first 12 volumes oi Badger History, 1947-1959. 

Romano, Louis G., and Georgiady, Nicholas P. Ex- 
ploring Wisconsin. Follett, 1957. 

TuTT, Clara. Carl Schurz, Patriot. State Historical So- 
ciety of Wisconsin, 1960. The story of Schurz's life 
in Germany and the United States, including his 
career in Wisconsin. 

Wilder, Laura I. Little House in the Big Woods. Harper, 
1953. The author's early life in Wisconsin. 

Books for Older Readers 



Archer, Marion F. 

1963. 
Austin, H. Russell. 

of a Vanguard State. 
Bowman, Francis F. 



There Is a Happy Land. Whitman, 



The Wisconsin Story: The Building 
The Milwaukee Journal, 1 964. 
Why Wisconsin. The Author, 1948. 

Clark, James I. Chronicles of Wisconsin. State Historical 
Society of Wisconsin, 1955-1956. Includes 16 pam- 
phlets on Wisconsin history with bibliographies. Men 
of Wisconsin. 1957-1958. Four biographical pam- 
phlets. 

Gara, Larry. A Short History oj Wisconsin. State Histori- 
cal Society of Wisconsin, 1962. 

Havighurst, Walter, and Boyd, M. M. Song oj the Pines: 
A Story oj Norwegian Lumbering in Wisconsin. Winston, 
1949. 

Lawson, Marion. Solomon Juneau, Voyageur. Crowell, 
1960. A biography of the first landowner, first mayor, 
and first postmaster of Milwaukee. 

North, Sterling. Rascal: A Memoir oj a Better Era. 
Dutton, 1963. 

Whyte, Bertha K. Wisconsin Heritage. Branford, 1954. 
The state's history in text and pictures. 

Wisconsin: A Guide to the Badger State. Rev. ed. Hastings, 
1954. 



307 




Uiiivcrsily &lt;&gt;T Wiwcmisln 

Bascom Hall, on the University of Wisconsin Campus, 

is the historic main building of the Madison, Wis., university. 
In front of the building is a statue of Abraham Lincoln. 

WISCONSIN, UNIVERSITY OF, is a state land-grant, 
coeducational university on the shores of Lake Mendota 
in Madison, Wis. It has a major branch in Milwaukee, 
the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, and two-year 
University Centers in eight other cities. It also offers 
programs for the junior year in France, Mexico, and 
India for outstanding students. 

The university has colleges of letters and science, 
agriculture, and engineering. It also has schools of 
social work, home economics, phaimacy, law, medicine, 
education, journalism, library science, music, nursing, 
and commerce, an extension division, and a large grad- 
uate school. The scientific institutions at or near Madi- 
son include the Pine Blufl Observatory and the museum 
of the State Historical Society. The university also 
operates an educational television and radio station. 

The most popular school song is "On, Wisconsin!" 
The university's colors are cardinal and white, and its 
athletic teams are called Badgers. The university was 
chartered in 1848. For enrollment, see Universities 

AND Colleges (table). Fred H. Harrington 

WISCONSIN DELLS. See Dalles; Wisconsin (Places 
to Visit); Wisconsin River. 

WISCONSIN RIVER is a clear, beautiful stream that 
rises in Lac \'ieux Desert on the Michigan-Wisconsin 
boundaiy. It flows south to Portage, Wis., and then 
turns westward. The Wisconsin empties into the Missis- 
sippi River below Prairie du Chien. It is about 430 
miles long. The river was an important inland water- 
way during pioneer days, but its commercial use has 
declined. Portage, Merrill, Wausau, Wisconsin Rapids, 
and Stevens Point are the most important cities on the 
river's banks. 

Near the town of Wisconsin Dells, the Wisconsin 
River forms one of the most scenic spots in North Amer- 
ica. Here the stream has cut its way through the sand- 
stone rock to a depth of about 150 feet. It forms canyon 

walls cut in unusual shapes. James I. Clark 

See also Dalles. 

WISCONSIN STATE UNIVERSITY is the name of nine 
state-controlled, coeducational colleges in Wisconsin. 
All except the college at Menomonie offer courses 

308 



leading to bachelor's degrees in liberal arts and educa- 
tion, as well as preprofessional courses. For enrollment, 
see L'Nt^'ERSiTiES AND COLLEGES (table). 

At Eau Claire, the college offers 22 majors, including 
business education. It was founded in 1916. 

At La Crosse, the college offers a major in physical 
education with graduate work leading to a master's 
degree. It was founded in 1909. 

At Menomonie, StoiU State LIniversity offers majors 
in dietetics, instiuition management, and education 
leading to bachelor's and master's degrees. It was 
founded in 1893. 

At Oshkosh, the college offers a major in library 
science, physical education for women, and 17 other 
majors. It was founded in 1871. 

At Platteville, the state college and Institute of Tech- 
nology merged into the Wisconsin State Lfniversity dur- 
ing the 1959-60 school year. Bachelor's degrees are 
offered in 1 7 majors. The college was founded in 1866, 
and the institute in 1907. 

At River Falls, the college offers 20 majors, including 
agriculture. It was founded in 1874. 

At Stevens Point, the college offers 18 majors, includ- 
ing one each in conservation, home economics, and 
business education. It was founded in 1894. 

At Superior, the college offers 18 majors and gradu- 
ate work in education. It was founded in 1896. 

At Whitevi^ater, the college offers 14 majors. It was 

founded in 18(&gt;8. Eugene R. McPhee 

WISDOM TOOTH. See Teeth (Permanent Teeth). 
WISE, ISAAC MAYER (1819-1900), a prominent 
American rabbi, is generally considered the pioneer of 
Reform Judaism in America. He founded the Hebrew 
L'nion College in Cincinnati for the training of rabbis, 
and was its president from the time of its organization 
in 1875 until his death. Wise also helped organize the 
Union of American Hebrew Congregations in 1873, and 
the Central Conference of American Rabbis in 1889. 
He served as president of the Conference for 1 1 years. 
He was born at Steingrub, Bohemia, and came to the 
L'nited .States in 1846. Clifton e. Olmstead 

WISE, STEPHEN SAMUEL (1874-1949), was one of the 
best-known American Jewish leaders. He became noted 
for his liberalism and his wide activities in political and 
social life. He was born in Budapest, Hungary, and 
came to the L^nited States in 1875. He was educated at the 
College of the City of New York and Columbia Univer- 
sity. In 1907, Wise founded the Free Synagogue in New 
York City, and served as its rabbi until his death. In 
1922, he founded the Jew- 
ish Institute of Religion 
and served as its first presi- 
dent. He also helped or- 
ganize the American Jew- 
ish Congress. 

Wise was a champion of 
Zionism, and established 
the first section of the Fed- 
eration of American Zion- 
ists (see Zionism). He wrote 
many books, including //o;w 
lo Face Life (1917) and 
Child Versus Parent (1922). 
He also edited themagazine 

UpinlOn. Clieton E. Olmstead 



Stephen S. Wise 

Hnlsrii.111. mark Star 




WISH ART, GEORGE. See Knox, John. 

WISSLER, CLARK (1870-1947), an American anthro- 
pologist, was noted for his studies of the American 
Indians. He spent most of his career as a staff member 
of the American Museum of Natural History, and was 
also a professor at Yale University. In addition to many 
specialized writings on American Indians, his books 
include The Anurican Indian (1917) and Indians of the 
United Stales (\940). Wissler was born in VVa&gt;ne Count)', 
Indiana, and studied at Indiana and Columbia uni- 
versities. DwiD B. Stoi't 

WISTAR, CASPAR. See Glass (Eariy American 
Glass); Glass\sare (W'istarberg Glass). 

WISTER, OWEN (1860-1938). was an .American novel- 
ist. He became noted for The \'irginian (1902) and other 
stories of Western life as seen from tlie standpoint of a 
Philadelphian and Harvard graduate. VVister wrote 
biographies of Ulysses S. Grant. George Washington, 
and his friend, Theodore Roosevelt. Other works in- 
clude Red Men and White (1896), Philosophy 4 (1903), 
and Lady Baltimore (1906). Wister was born in Phila- 
delphia, on July 14, 1860. Harry H. Clark 

WISTERIA, wis TEA rih uh, is the name of a group of 
thick-growing vines that bear great clusters of flowers 
and belong to the pea family. The wisteria that is most 
often seen growing around homes in the United States 
is a native of China. One of the showiest climbing 
plants, it has graceful clusters of bluish-lavender blos- 
soms that resemble pea blossoms. The\' droop from a 
heavy screen of foliage. The flower clusters of the wis- 
teria are 1 to 2 feet long. One kind of wisteria is said to 
have branches that reach out 300 feet from each side of 
the central woody stalk. Another is said to have covered 
nearly 1,000 square feet of wall space. Wisteria is an 
easy plant to grow. It must be given a deep soil, plenty 
of moisture, and an opportunity to climb to great 
heights. 

Scientific Classification. Wisteria belongs to the family 
Leguminosae. The common wisteria is genus Wisteria, 
species sinensis. alfrld c. hottes 

WISTITI, or OUISTITI. See Marmoset. 

WITCH BALLS. See Glassware (Nailsea Glass). 

WITCH HAZEL is a shrub or small tree used to make a 
soothing lotion. The witch hazel grows in woods of the 
eastern United States and Canada. Its jointed, curving 
branches twist and point in all directions. The forked 
t\vigs have been used for divining rods, and the name 





S 


r 


^ 




wL%r 


4 







J. Horace McFarlanU 

Witch Hazel Has Showy Flowers After Its Leaves Die. 

witch hazel comes from this use by superstitious people. 
It is sometimes called tohaccowood, because of the sharp 
taste of its bark. It is also called spotted alder and winter- 
bloom in many places. 

After the leaves have died, in October or November, 
the witch hazel beai-s its flowers. They grow in feathery, 
golden clusters. The fruits do not ripen until the next 
year. Then the seeds shoot from their small wood)' cap- 
sules to a distance of several feet or )'ards. 

Witch hazel lotion, or hamamelin, is a tonic and heal- 
ing astringent, applied on the skin or taken internally. 
It is made by distilling the bark and leaves in alcohol. 
Doctors prescribe it for bruises, sprains, piles, ulcers, 
hemorrhage, and skin troubles. 

Scientific Classification. Witch hazel belongs to the 
family Hamamclidaceae. It is genus Hamarnelis, species 
virginiana. Theodore W. Bretz 

WITCH OF ENDOR lived in a town by that name 
(now called Indur) in Palestine. The Bible tells us that 
Saul, the first king of the Hebrews, consulted her before 
the battle with the Philistines in which he was killed. 
(I Sam. 28:7). 

J. Horace McFarland 




Wisteria Flowers grow in 

long, graceful clusters which 
moke this one of the most at- 
tractive vining plants. The flow- 
ers resemble pea blossoms. 
Climbing wisteria vines grow to 
great heights on outdoor walls. 



309 




The Salem Witchcraft Trials were a shameful example of 
intolerance and stupidity. A West Indian slave told voodoo tales 
to several New England children. Their parents accused the 



slave of witchcraft. Cotton Mather, a colonial preacher, encour- 
aged the trials, at which Judge Samuel Sewall presided. More 
than 150 New Englanders were jailed on suspicion. 



WITCHCRAFT is the practice of evil acts by witches, 
or people supposed to have evil power. From earliest 
times, people in all parts of the world have believed in 
witches. A witch's power was believed to have been 
given, or sold, by devils. 

Most people no longer believe in witchcraft. But 
some primitive persons still cling to their belief in evil, 
mysterious powers. Such persons believe that accidents 
may be caused by an individual who has these mystic 
powers. They believe that a person who practices witch- 
craft calls upon spirits or demons to rise up and hurt his 
or her enemies. This belief in evil spirits, or demons, is 
called demonology. 

Witches. The meaning of the word wttch has changed 
tlirough the years. Originally, a witch could be either 
a man or woman who was supposed to have super- 
natural power. In ancient times, this power was not 
always evil, but might be the power of prophecy (see 
Witch of Endor). 

Gradually, the meaning of the word witch changed. 
People no longer believed in male witches. They 
thought that some men, called wizards, or warlocks, had 
supernatural abilities, not necessarily evil. But many 
persons still believed that a man could practice some 
forms of witchcraft after taking lessons from a female 
witch. 

Perhaps the most fantastic of all a witch's powers 
was the ability to ride through the air on a broom. 
People believed that a witch's broom could fly any- 
where, at any desired speed, and at any height. They 
needed no proof of actually seeing a witch in flight. 
People also believed that witches could hide them- 



selves by turning into animals. Many persons accused 
witches of manying demons and bearing monster chil- 
dren. People also thought a witch had peculiar tattoo 
marks, such as toads or the foot of a hare. 

Practices. Early people who believed in witchcraft 
and the primitive people who still believe in it think 
that a person may become bewitched in different ways. 
The process usually takes place through some physical 
part of the one who is being cursed. Sometimes a witch 
may lay a curse on his victim by using the parings of the 
victim's fingernails, a lock of his hair, or a piece of his 
clothing. In early days, people used to destroy their 
nail parings and hair clippings to keep from being 
bewitched. Sometimes a witch casts a spell by reciting 
a magic formula. This spell may bring punishment to 
a victim. The witch usually mutters the victim's name 
while he is casting the spell. Early people who feared 
witches sometimes used false names so that their true 
names would not come to the attention of any witches. 

Witchcraft can supposedly be directed against crops 
and cattle as well as against individuals. A curse may 
be cast on everything that a man owns. Practicers of 
witchcraft claim the power to raise storms, to ruin crops, 
to turn men into animals, and to work miracles. In 
some primitive groups, the fear of bewitchment keeps 
eveiybody on his best behavior. 

History. People practiced witchcraft in the days of the 
early Romans, and several thousand years before that 
time witchcraft was practiced in Egypt. Records have 
been found which show that Roman laws were passed to 
make the practice of witchcraft a crime. These laws for- 
bade people to destroy crops, pull down crosses or re- 



310 



ligious objects, dig up corpses, or make images — espe- 
cially those to be used in witchcraft. .Sudden death or 
illness might arouse suspicion of witchcraft. The failure 
of crops might be charged to the curse of some human 
"devil." An innocent person of strange habits might be 
accused of witchcraft by enemies who held a grudge 
against him. 

Early Christian churches persecuted many innocent 
persons who were thought to be witches. Historians 
believe that the church put to death about 300.000 
innocent women between the years 1484 and 1782. 
\ictims were often tortured so brutally that they con- 
fessed to being witches in order to end their torture. 
In Europe, church persecutions occurred in Gemiany, 
England. France, .Spain, and Italy. .See Inquisition. 

In early America, witches were pereecuted in parts 
of Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Virginia. The terror 
reached its high point in .Salem. Mass. A colonial 
preacher named Cotton Mather did much to arouse the 
people against the evil work of witches. In 1692, as a 
result of Mather's efforts, the colonists executed 19 
persons as witches, and sent 150 more to prison. These 
were the last persecutions for witchcraft in the American 
colonies. 

People used many kinds of tests to decide whether a 
woman was a witch. One of these was the pricking 
test. Spots were found on the skin where pins could be 
stuck without causing pain. .Such spots were said to be 
places where the devil had touched the witch. In 
another test, people threw the suspected woman into a 
body of water. If she floated, she was thought guilt)' 
of being a witch. If she drowned, at least she did so 
with the community believing her innocent. 

The spirits played an important part in evidence 
against suspected witches. At a trial in England, some 
children were reported to have fallen into fits of vomit- 
ing crooked pins. Persons testified that the children 
could not utter the word "Lord," but that they could 
easily cry ".Satan." Many pei^sons who heard of the case 
believed that these children had been cureed by some 
witch, and that evil spirits had entered their bodies. 

Many well-meaning and important pereons took part 
in the campaign to wipe out witchcraft. Today we find 
it difficult to understand how so many persons could 
have beliesed in such superstitions. We may ask: how 
did witchcraft develop in the first place? The practice 
grew out of the ignorance of primitive tribes. Fear and 
superstition ruled instead of knowledge and reason. In 
the early days of man, even an eclipse of the sim was 
said to be the work of tlie devil. Magic stones and chants 
were used to cure illness because people knew nothing 
about medicine. They thought that die world was 
divided into a kingdom of good and a kingdom of evil. 
When a man suffered pain or disease, it was the work 
of the devil. Somehow the devil had to be driven from 
his body. As late as 1 788, London ministers tried to 
drive away the evil spirits from a boy who was suffering 
from epilepsy. The ministers believed that the spirits 
had caused the boy's affliction, and that driving them 
from his body would lead to the lad's recovery. 

As tlie world gained more knowledge, the fear of 
witchcraft gradually disappeared. But witchcraft caused 
much suffering before civilization substituted reason 
for ignorance. 

In England, the last trial for witchcraft took place 



WITNESS 

in 1722, but the accused woman was freed. The same 
year marked the last killing for witchcraft in Scodand. 
In 1 735 Scotland repealed all laws dealing with witch- 
craft. But there are still persons in Europe and America, 
as well as among primitive tribes in other parts of the 
world, who believe that their lives are influenced by 

witches. John Mulholland 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Colonial Life in .America Mask (pictures) 

(Religion) Mather (family) 

E\il Eye Sewall, Samuel 

Hecate .Superstition 

Magic Voodoo 

WITCHWEED is a plant that grows as a parasite on the 
roots of corn and some kinds of grass. It was first 
identified in the United States in 1955. It has small, 
nanow leaves and red or yellow flowers. Its tiny 
seeds are spread by the wind and live many years. 

Scientific Classification. The witchweed belongs to the 
figwort family, Scrojihulariaceae. It is classified as genus 
Striga, species S. aswtua. Arthur Cronquist 

WITENAGEMOT, WIT uh nuh guh moht, means a 
meeting of the witan (or icise men) of Anglo-Saxon England. 
The witan were royal counsellors, including bishops, 
abbots, earls, and the thanes, or followers, who held house- 
hold offices or important positions in local government. 
The king could summon any thane he wished to attend. 

The king consulted his witan before taking important 
steps, such as issuing laws, granting lands, making war 
or peace, appointing bishops or earls, or granting privi- 
leges to churches or monasteries. The witan also func- 
tioned as a royal court, giving judgment in important 
lawsuits. The witan could assume extraordinar\' powers, 
such as dethroning a king or choosing a new king in 
a disputed succession. The Norman conquerors of Eng- 
land in 1066 replaced the witenagemot with die curia 
regis (king's court). Robert S. Hoyt 

WITHERITE. See Barium. 

WITHERSPOON, JOHN (1723-1794), was a leader in 
.•\merican political, religious, and educational life. He 
served in the Continental Congress and signed the 
Declaration of Independence. Witherspoon was born in 
.Scodand. He was a Presb\terian minister before coming 
to .\merica in 1 768 to become president of the College 
of New Jereey (now Princeton L'nivereity). After the 
Revolutionaiy \Var, he continued his duties as college 

president. Richard B. Morris 

WITHHOLDING TAX. See Ruml, Beardslev; In- 
CO-ME Tax. 

WITNESS is a pereon who gives testimony before a 
court or in a judicial proceeding. His testimony is given 
under oath, or, if his religion forbids an oadi, under 
affirmation. \ witness may also be a person who signs 
a legal instniment, such as a will or deed, that another 
person executes in the witness' presence. 

A court witness is ordered to appear in court by a 
subpoena, which compels him to attend and to give 
evidence. If he fails to appear, he is liable to punish- 
ment for contempt of court. If he testifies untnjthfully 
he is guilty of the crime of perjury, and can be severely 
punished. A witness may legally refuse to testifv' 
against himself or his spouse. 

The question of who is fit to serve as a witness is 



3" 



WITTENBERG UNIVERSITY 

regulated by rides of evidence. The law regards certain 
persons as unfit to give legal testimony. Insane persons 
and persons unable to understand the nature of a bind- 
ing oath are included in this class. Huntinoton Cairns 

See also Oath; Perjury; Subpoena. 

WITTENBERG UNIVERSITY. See Universities and 
Colleges (table). 

WIZARD. See Witchcraft. 

WIZARD OF MENLO PARK. See Edison, Thomas A. 

WIZARD OF OZ. .See Baim. Lyman Frank. 

W. K. KELLOGG FOUNDATION. See Kellogg 
Foundation, W. K. 

WODEHOUSE, ifOOD hows, "P. G.," PELHAM 

GRENVILLE(1881- ), is a famous novelist and short- 

stoiy writer. His books be- 



P. G 



Wodehouse 

Doubleday. Doran 




came popular for their rich 
and outlandish humor and 
for their caricatures of Eng- 
lish types. Several of his 
characters, especially Bertie 
VVooster, Jeeves, and 
Psmith, have become fa- 
mous. His works include 
Leave It to Psnuth (1923), 
The Inimitable Jeeves ( 1 924), 
I he Code of the H'ooslers 
(\938), French Leave (1959), 
Carry on Jeeves (1961), and 
Stiff Upper Lip, Jeeves ( 1 963). 
Wodehouse was born in 
Guildford, England, and studied at Dulwich College. 
Later he wrote a humorous column for a London news- 
paper. He was captured by the Germans in France in 
1 940 and was held for a time in a prison camp. Wode- 
house became an American citizen in 1955. R. W. Stallman 
WODEN. See Odin. 

WOFFORD COLLEGE. See Universities and Col- 
leges (table). 

WOHLER, VUH ler, FRIEDRICH (1800-1882), a Ger- 
man chemist, in 1828 became the first man to make an 
organic substance (in this case urea) from inorganic 
chemicals. His experiments destroyed the belief that 
organic substances could be formed only in the living 
bodies of plants or animals. 

Wohler isolated the element beryllium, and was the 
first man to measure the specific gravity of aluminum 
(see Aluminum [The First Aluminum]). His method of 
preparing phosphorus was similar to that still used 
after World War L WoUer's studies on cyanates and 
uric acid were of fundamental importance to science. 
Wohler was born at Eschersheim, Germany. In 1825 
he became a cheinistry instructor at the Polytechnic 
School in Berlin. He later became professor of chemistry 
at the University of Gottingen. K. L. Kaufman 

Sec also Chemistry (picture. Famous Men). 
WOJCIECHOWSKA, MAIA (1927- ), won the 
1965 Xewbery medal for her children's book Shadow of 
a Bull (1964). She also wi-ote Market Day for 'Ti Andre 
(1952). She was born in Warsaw, Poland, but became 
a United States citizen in 1951. She studied in Europe 
and at Immaculate Heart College in Los .Angeles. 

WOLCOTT is the family name of three Connecticut 
patriots who were active in early American politics. 



Roger WolcoU (1679-1767) was colonial governor of 
Connecticut from 1 750 to 1 754. He was second in com- 
mand at the Battle of Louisbourg in 1 745. Wolcott wrote 
Poetical Meditations (1725), the first poetry book pub- 
lished in Connecticut. He was born in Windsor, Conn. 

Oliver Wolcott ( 1 726- 1 797). the son of Roger Wolcott, 
was a Connecticut signer of the Declaration of Inde- 
pendence. He served in the Continental Congress from 
1 775 to 1 778 and from 1 780 to 1 784. He commanded 14 
Revolutionary War regiments that helped defend New 
York in 1 776. Wolcott was governor of Connecticut 
from 1 796 until his death. He was born in Windsor, and 
was graduated from Yale College. 

Oliver Wolcott, Jr. (1760-1833), the son of Oliver 
Wolcott, succeeded Alexander Hamilton as Secretary 
of the Treasury in 1795. He resigned in 1800 after he 
and Hamilton became involved in a political attack 
against President John Adams. Wolcott was governor of 
Connecticut from 1817 to 1827. He was born in Litch- 
field, and was graduated from Yale. Richard b. morrb 

WOLF is a wild animal that looks much like a large 
German shepherd dog. But it has longer legs and larger 
feet. It also has more powerful jaws, a wider head, and 
short ears that always stand up straight. The wolf has a 
long, bushy tail. 

Most male wolves weigh considerably more than 100 
pounds, but females weigh less. Wolves can travel for 
hours at about 20 miles per hour. 

Wolves may be white, gray, brown, or black. In gen- 
eral, wolves of the northern and arctic regions are 
lighter in color than those of the southern forests. The 
arctic wolf may be pure white. The timber wolf is often 



Ttie Gray Timber Wolf lives in the Rocky Mountains and the 
heavily wooded regions of Canada and the northern United States. 



A ^'¥HMB 


WM 




H 


^^^^^HBB^^^' 


^M 


j^^^^^^^^^^^p^riHj|k^^_:v4 '|Mt _^A 


^ 
^-"•&lt;i 




&gt; 




'-'-»*:; 

"^i^ 
L ^ 



312 



called the gray wolf because its long, thick coat is 
medium to light gray. The red wolf, a much smaller 
animal, gets its name from its reddish coat. 

Wolves have strong family ties. They often mate for 
life. The female usually bears from four to si.\ pups 
about two months after mating. The pups are usually 
born in April or May in a den dug in the earth. They 
do not begin to see until they are about a week old. 
Both parents supply the pups with food and train them. 
Wolf families remain together for long periods, and 
most wolf packs are just family groups. \Vhen traveling 
in a pack, the howls or calls of individual wolves help 
keep the group together. 

Wolves live in North America, Greenland, Europe, 
and Asia. They may be found in northern Canada and 
Alaska, and in a few wilderness areas in the United 
States, such as in northern Minnesota. The wolves' 
howls once sounded in almost every part of the United 
States and Canada. But civilization pushed these 
animals back until today they are in danger of com- 
plete extinction. Bounties (rewards) have been offered 
for wolf pelts because wolves sometimes kill livestock. 
As a result, farmers and ranchers have killed many 
wolves. In the far north or in wild regions, however, 
wolves form a vital part of the natural community. 
Wolves are master hunters and they kill sick or injured 
caribou, moose, or deer that would be a burden to the 
herd. 

Scientific Classification. Wolves belong to the family 
Canidae. The gray and arctic wolf arc genus Canis, species 
C. lupus. The red wolf is C. niger. William o. prlitt, jr. 

See also Arctic Wolf; Bounty. 



WOLFE, JAMES 

WOLF, HUGO. See Music (The Later 1800's: Na- 
tionalism). 

WOLF, TASMANIAN. .See Tasmanian Wolf. 

WOLF CREEK DAM is a flood-control and power proj- 
ect on the Cumberland River near Jamestown, Ky. 
The combination concrete and earth dam is 258 feet 
high, with a top length of 5,736 feet. It can control a 
volume of 1 1,568,900 cubic yards of water. It was built 
under the direction of the United States Army Corps 
of Engineers. The Wolf Creek Reservoir is 101 miles 
long, and covers an area of 63,530 acres. 

.See also Dam. 

WOLF FISH live in the North Atlantic and the North 
Pacific. The wolf fish gets its name from its terri- 
fying appearance. This savage fish will try to attack 
anyone who captures it. It has powerful jaws and its 
bite can be extremely painful. It is reddish or grayish 
in color, and has no pelvic fins. The North Adantic 
wolf fish grows about 3 feet long, while the North Pa- 
cific wolf fish sometimes reaches feet. The fish spawns 
large eggs that cluster together in a ball. 

The wolf fish uses its broad, strong front teeth to 
cmsh the shells of the animals it eats. Its flesh tastes 
much like that of the cod. It is a favorite food fish in 
Iceland. Its strong, durable skin makes a good leather 
used for pouches, book bindings, and other articles. 

Scientific Classification. The North Atlantic wolf fish 
is in the family Anarlnchadidae. It is genus Anarhichas, 
species .-1. lupus. The North Pacific lish is in the family 
Anarhichthyidae . It is classified as genus .\narrhuhthys, 
species A. ocellatus. Leonard p. Schultz 



The Arctic Wolf is the master hunter of the north. It is often 
bred with domestic dogs to produce a strong, hardy sled dog. 



The Wolf Fish is Savage in Appearance and Habits. 





^rJ ' 



WOLFE, JAMES (1727-1759), was the British general 
whose success in the battle of Quebec in 1759 won 
Canada for the British Empire. His victory against the 
French came after several discouraging failures, due in 
part to his poor judgment. His greatness as a general has 
sometimes been exaggerated because of his dramatic 
death at the moment of victory. 

Before the attack on Quebec, Wolfe moved his troops 
up the Saint Lawrence River to a landing \vell above 
the city. The troops slipped down the river during the 
night of Sept. 12-13, 1759, to a point much nearer the 
city. They landed there, and then climbed a steep bluff 
on the north side of the river to the plains outside the 
city walls. When General Montcalm, the French com- 
mander, discovered the British in the morning, he 
decided to fight on the site Wolfe had chosen. 



313 




Brown Bros. 

James Wolfe Died at the Moment of Victory at Quebec in 1759, When His British Forces Defeated the French. 



The battle lasted less than 15 minutes. Wolfe was 
wounded twice, but continued in command until a 
third bullet struck him in the lungs. He died just as the 
French were breaking. General Montcalm was also 
mortally wounded, and lived only a few hours longer 
(see Montcalm, M.\rquis De; Quebec. Battle of). 

Wolfe was born in the County of Kent, England. He 
joined the army when he was 14, and served in Flanders 
and Scotland. He served as a brigadier in the French 
and Indian War of 1754 to 1763. He served under Lord 
Jeffery Amherst in the Louisbourg expedition, in which 
he led front-line troops (see Amherst, Lord Jeffery; 
Louisbourg). 

Wolfe returned to England after that battle, but 
William Pitt, then Prime Minister, selected him to 
command the expedition against Quebec. His success 
there, at the cost of his life, permitted the British to 
seize Montreal in the following year and to complete 
the conquest of Canada (see Canada, History of [The 
British Conquest]). vv. b. w.llcox 

WOLFE, THOMAS CLAYTON (1900-1938), was one 
of the most eloquent and forceful .American novelists. 
Although he was criticized for his lack of discipline, he 
captured the tempestuousness of his age in a powerful 
prose that was often close to poetiy. 

His first ambition was to become a playwright. When 
he failed at this, he turned to the novel, for which he 
was better suited. Look Homeward. Angel, which was 
published in 1929, after many difficulties, won him a 



large and devoted audience. The novel was made into 
a stage play in 1957. Of Time and the River (1935) and 
The Web and the Rock (1939) were, like his first novel, 
drastically reduced in size by Maxwell E. Perkins, 
Wolfe's editor. Both these novels were also successful. 
Wolfe's subject matter was always close to his own 
life. He said, in fact, that all great art was neces- 
sarily autobiographical. Mucli of his power lay in giving 
an epic quality to his experiences, such as those of his 
boyhood in Look Homeward, Angel, so that the experi- 
ences took on a symbolic importance. Wolfe also wrote 
The Story of a Novel (1936), and three works published 
after his death, You Cari't Go Home Again (1940), Letters 
to His Al other (1943), and 



Thomas Wolfe 




Poems (ig45). 

Wolfe was born in Ashe- 
ville, N.C. He was gradu- 
ated from the L'niversity of 
North Carolina and froiB 
Harvard L'niversity. Wolfe 
taught at New York L'niver- 
sity from 1924 to 1930. The 
success of Look Homeward, 
Angel freed him from the 
necessity of teaching. In 
r938, Wolfe contracted 
pneumonia. He died after 
surgery for a brain infec- 
tion. Richard Ellmann 



314 



WOLFF, CASPAR FRIEDRICH. See HEREDm- (The 

ll&gt;00"sand 17U0's). 

WOLFHOUND is the name of a family of dogs made 
up of three breeds — the Irish wolfhound, the Russian 
wolfhound, and the Scottish deerhound. The Irish dog is 
the largest of all dogs, although not the heaviest. It was 
the companion of ancient Irish kings, and is still used 
for hunting. 

The Russian wolfhound resembles the greyhound ex- 
cept for its long, luxuriant coat. The breed was de- 
veloped by the Russian czars, who used these dogs to 
chase and destroy wolves. 

The Scottish deerhound descended from the stag- 
hound and other large breeds once used for stalking 
deer. It is a large, striking dog, though smaller than the 

Irish wolfhound. S. Edwin Mlgarcee, jr. 

.See also Borzoi; Dog (color picture, Hounds); Irish 
Wolfhound; Scottish Deerhound. 

WOLFRAM is another name for tungsten. See Tung- 
sten; \VOLFR.'\MITE. 

WOLFRAM VON ESCHENBACH. See German Lit- 
erature (Epic Poetry); Minnesinger. 

WOLFRAMITE is one of the two important natural 
sources of tungsten. Wolframite is a mineral made up of 
iron, manganese, tungsten, and oxygen. It is called an 
iron-manganese tungstate, and its symbol is (Fe,Mn) 
\V04. The other important source of tungsten is scheelite 
(calcium tungstate, CaW'OJ. The greatest deposits of 
wolframite are found in China, Australia, and India. 
If the ore has tnore iron than manganese, it is called 
fiibeiite. If it has more manganese than iron, it is called 
huebnerite. See also Tungsten. a. Pabst 

WOLLASTON LAKE covers 906 square miles in north- 
eastern Saskatchewan, Canada. The lake is 70 miles 
long and 25 miles across at its widest point. Its waters 
flow into both the Mackenzie and Churchill rivers. The 
lake is named for William Hyde Wollaston (1 766-1828), 
a famous English chemist. 

WOLLOMOMBI FALL is located on the headstream of 
the Macleay River in New South Wales, Australia. It 
is about 22 miles east of the city of Armidale. 'Ihe fall 
has a drop of 1,700 feet, making it one of the highest 
waterfalls in the world. 

WOLSELEY, WOOLZ Hh, GARNET JOSEPH (1833- 
1913), \"iscouNT WoLSELEV, was a British soldier. He 
fought in the second Burmese \Var, the Crimean War, 
the Indian Mutiny in 1857, and in China. In 1870 he 
put down the Red River Rebellion in Canada, and in 
1882, the revolt of Arabi Pasha in Egypt (see Red 
River Rebellion). He arrived in Khartoum in 1884 too 
late to save General Charles Gordon (see Gordon, 
Charles George). Wolseley served as chief of the army 
from 1895 to 1899. He made many reforms in armv 
organization. Wolseley was born in Ireland, and joined 
die British Army at the age of 19. ]\mf.s l. Godfrey 

WOLSEY, WOOL zih, THOMAS CARDINAL (1475?- 
1530), was an English statesman and a cardinal of the 
Roman Catholic Church. He was the most powerful 
man in England for many years. 

Wolsey was born at Ipswich, where his father was a 
butcher. He was educated at Magdalen College, Oxford 
University. Several years after his graduation, he was 
elected a fellow of the college. In 1498, he was ordained 
a priest, and became rector of Limington, in Somerset. 
He later became chaplain to the Archbishop of Canter- 



WOLVERINE STATE 

bur)', and then cha|)lain to the English governor of 
Calais. Wolsey's Oxlbrd friends and his own driving am- 
bition helped his rapid rise to jiolitical power. By 1507 
he had become chaplain to King Henry V'll. The king 
often used Wolsey in diplomatic missions, and rev/arded 
him in 1509 by making him Dean of Lincoln. 

When Heniy V'lII became king in 1509, Wolsey's 
affairs prospered. He became Canon of Windsor in 1511 
and received high church positions. He also became a 
member of the Priv)' Council in 1511, and soon was the 
controlling figure in all matters of state. 

In 1514, he was made Bishop of Lincoln, and then 
Archbishop of York. The next &gt;'ear Pope Leo X made 
him a ca'-dinal. ^Volsey loved display and wealth. He 
lived in royal splendor and reveled in his power. His 
ambition was to become pope. 

Cardinal Wolsey spent his great abilities as a states- 
man and administrator mainly in managing England's 
foreign affairs for Henry VIII. Despite the many ene- 
mies his greed and ambi- 
tion earned him, he held 
Henry V'lII's confidence 
until Henry decided to di- 
vorce his wife, Catherine of 
Aragon, and many Anne 
Boleyn (see Henry \'I11). 
\Volsey disapproved of this, 
and was slow in arranging 
the divorce. The delay an- 
gered the king, and made 
Wolsey an enemy of Anne 
Boleyn and her friends. 

His fall was sudden and 
complete. .Stripped of office 
and property, he was per- 
mitted to remain Archbishop of York. But shortly 
afterward, he was accused of treason and ordered to 
London. In great distress, he set out for the capital. He 
fell ill and died on the way. 'Tf I had served God," 
Cardinal Wolsey said remorsefully, "as diligently as I 
have done the king, He would not have given me over 
in my grey hairs." Paul m. Kendall 

WOLVERINE, ifOOL vur EEN, is a fur-bearing animal 
of the weasel family which lives in the northern woods 
of Europe, Asia, and North America. Europeans call it 
the glutton. The wolverine is related to badgers, skunks, 
and otters. The animal has a heav)' build and short legs. 
It is about 2\ feet long. It looks something like a bear. 
The animal has dark, shaggy hair with white markings. 
It is one of the most powerful animals for its size in 
the world. The L'niversity of Michigan has taken the 
name the Wolverines for its athletic squads. 

The wolverines of North America once roamed from 
northern Canada far south into northern parts of the 
L^nited States. They could steal bait from hunters' 
traps with great cunning. They seemed to kill for the 
love of killing, and destroyed more animals than they 
could eat. Wolverines are rare today because they have 
been hunted mthlessly. 

Scientific Classification. The wolverine belongs to the 
family Mustelidae. It is classified as genus Gulo, species 
G. luscus. Harold e. Anthony 

WOLVERINE STATE. See Michigan. 




Th.' .\il In&lt;;litule i.f Chicago 

Thomas Cardinal Wolsey 



315 



WOMAN 




General Electric 



Homemaker and Mother is a woman's most important role. 
The love and training she gives to her children are vitally 
important to the individual, the community, and the nation. 
Throughout history, women have taken care of their families and 
their homes. American pioneer women shared hardships and 
dangers with their husbands in settling the wilderness, above. 



WOMAN. There are important differences between 
men and women beyond the primary fact that women 
are the mothers of men. Scientists are generally agreed 
that men in general are stronger and quicker than wom- 
en, although there are many individual e.xceptions to 
this rule. A champion woman tennis player can defeat 
thousands of ordinary men players, for example. Scien- 
tists have found little difference between men and 
women in the size of their brains or in their ability to 
think. Most tests have shown that the two sexes are 
about equal in mental ability, or that women are slightly 
superior. But there are emotional differences between 
men and women which serve to create mental dif- 
ferences. Most women think in terms of specific, person- 
al needs and desires, while men are apt to think more 
abstractly. For this reason, women generally are more 
interested in social welfare than in science, and prefer 
psychology to philosophy. 

These secondary differences between men and women 
have caused problems for mankind which have increased 
as civilization has advanced. In early times, and even in 
primitive tribes of today, women have fitted easily into 
simple social schemes. The physical differences between 
men and women made for a natural division of labor. 
The men were the hunters and fighters. The women 
tended the fire, prepared the meals, made the cloth- 
ing, and cared for the children. 

Most women perform these same duties of homemak- 

316 



ing and child care today, although they now have many 
laborsaving devices that make their work easier. But 
millions of women, either from choice or necessity, 
work outside the home. Here they find themselves in 
competition with men, in a world that still gives men 
most of the advantages and opportunities for advance- 
ment and leadership. For hundreds of years, women 
have been rulers either in fact or as powers behind 
thrones, but in general they did not attain the right to 
vote until the 1900"s. In many parts of the world, they 
do not hold full citizenship even today. Their campaign 
for equal rights, and for equal pay for equal work, is 
still being waged even in the most progressive and 
advanced democracies. 

The Influence of Women in History 

While mankind has been slow to grant woman full rec- 
ognition, her influence on the course of human progress 
has been great. The thread of woman's influence stands 
out in the unraveling of all recorded history. Helen of 
Troy and Cleopatra of Egypt are famous examples of 
women whose influence was greater than that of many 
men of their time. Queen Isabella of Spain had much 
more to do with the success of Columbus' voyages than 
Ferdinand. Some of the most active chapters in human 
histoiy occurred during the reigns of such feminine rulers 
as Catherine of Russia; Mary, Queen of Scots; and 
Queen Elizabeth I of England. History is full of the in- 



fluence of women who wielded their power behind the 
formal authority of a man, as did Madame de Pompa- 
dour during the reign of Louis XV of France. 

But women in the mass have exerted greater and more 
humanizing influences on the course of histor\' than any 
of the so-called "great women" of the ages. Women were 
vital factors in all the great movements of mankind. 
Historians are generally agreed that the French Revolu- 
tion could not have succeeded without the "citizenesses" 
who encouraged their men and e\en fought with them 
in the barricaded streets of Paris. The Pilgrim women 
who endured the hardships of the first winter in New 
England provided deathless proof of the courage and en- 
durance of women. 

The women of the American Revolution played no 
less a part in that fight against tyranny than did the 
women of France in the French Revolution, The 
American West could not have been settled without 
the skill and bravery of the pioneer women who 
labored and improvised to make homes in the wilder- 
ness, and e\en picked up gims to fight beside their men 
when hostile Indians attacked. French attempts to colo- 
nize Canada \\ere largely a failure until the arrival of 
the "King's Brides," who became the wi\'es of the bache- 
lor colonists and helped them establish homes. 

Beginning with the Industrial Revolution in the 
1760"s, women began taking their place in industrial 
life. Constantly increasing numbers of women have en- 
tered into actixities that once were exclusively the do- 
main of men. Today, there are no fields of enterprise 
which women ha\e not entered, and where the best of 
them have not made outstanding successes. It is true 
that many of them ha\e found serious conflicts between 
a career and their fimdamental desires for love and mar- 
riage. Women have also found that their participation 
in trades and professions has been marked by unfairness 
in wage rates or salaries, and in opportunities to advance 
themselves. But many of these difficulties have been 
ON'ercome by women in the democracies, and there is 
confidence among women that their remaining goals 
are attainable. 

Feminist leaders point out that women have usually 
achieved the goals they desire. In her book Woman as 
a Force in History, Mary Beard reaches the conclusion 
that "the dogma of woman's complete historical sub- 
jection to men must be rated as one of the most fan- 
tastic myths ever created by the human mind." 

Contributions to Culture 

From the first, woinan's entering into the arts and 
sciences was marked by outstanding contributions to the 
knowledge and culture of humanity. These contribu- 
tions have been made in such fields as science, medicine, 
government, nursing, welfare, education, literature, 
journalism, sculpture, architecture, engineering, drama, 
international relations, labor organization, and aviation. 
Women have become governors of states, they have 
been elected to Congress, and they have been appointed 
to diplomatic posts. In the United States, women 
teachers are responsible for almost all education in the 
elementary grades. Hundreds of city school systems are 
made up almost entirely of women, and many women 
themselves believe this situation is out of balance. In 
other fields, the opportunities for women ha\"e been 
limited, but individual contributions have been great. 



WOMAN 

In Social Advancement, women have been particu- 
larly acti\e. The number of outstanding women social 
workers is large, and is constantly increasing. One of the 
greatest social workers was Jane Addams, founder of 
Hull-House, the famous international settlement house 
in Chicago. Miss Addams inspired other leaders in social 
welfare, such as Florence Kelley, who became the first 
factory inspector of Illinois, and Julia Lathrop, the first 
chief of the Children's Bureau of the United States De- 
partment of Labor. In the field of health and welfare, 
Florence Nightingale, pioneer nurse, and Clara Barton, 
founder of the American Red Cross, are especially 
notable. 

Leaders in the movement to improve woman's lot in- 
clude Sarah Margaret Fuller, one of the most learned 
women of the 1800's; Lucretia Coffin Mott, a minister in 
the Society of Friends and promoter of many social and 
domestic reforms; and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, one of 
the earliest women lawyers and a founder of the suffra- 
gist moveinent. Margaret Sanger is noted for her work 
as an ad\ocate of birth control and foimder of the 
American Birth Control League, now the Planned 
Parenthood Federation of America. 

In the field of education, many women rose above the 
ranks of their sister teachers. Anna Garlin Spencer, in- 
structor in leading American universities during the 
early 1900's, first brought to public attention the need 



Ttie Woman Teacher Finds Many Rewards in educating 
children. Teaching ranks as the most popular profession among 
women in the United States. Women hold most of the teaching 
posts in the elementary grades, and about half of those posit'ois 
in secondary schools. An increasing number of women hold 
teaching and administrative positions in colleges. 




317 




The Woman Doctor has won equal rank with men in one of the 
most exacting of all professions. About one-fourth of all pro- 
fessional women work in medicine and other fields of health. 



H. Armstrong Roberts 

The Woman Scientist has contributed many valuable dis- 
coveries and ideas for a better living. Women now do important 
work in all of the scientific fields. 



for women's participation in broad cultural activities in 
her book, Ji'oman^s Share in Social Culture. The Russell 
Sage Foundation for the improvement of social and 
living conditions was founded by a woman, Margaret 
Olivia Slocum Sage, who left several million dollars to 
the promotion of research into the social problems of the 
nation. Mary Van Kleeck, a director of the foundation, 
conducted valuable studies on industry and the prob- 
lems of employees. Edith Abbott and Sophonisba Breck- 
enridge founded the first school of social service ad- 
ministration at the University of Chicago. 

In the Sciences, women have probably met the great- 
est test of their ability to demonstrate equality with men. 
During the !890'sDr. M. Carey Thomas, later president 
of Bryn Mawr College, asked to attend a class at Johns 
Hopkins University school of medicine in Baltimore. No 
woman had ever before been permitted to attend the 
lectures, and Dr. Thomas was granted her recjuest only 
on condition that she sit behind a screen. Today the 
"screen" has disappeared, and women have not only 
witnessed and studied new discoveries of science, but 
many of them also have made valuable discoveries of 
their own. 

When Madame Marie Curie and her husband an- 
nounced the discovery of radium in 1898, the woman 
scientist won immediate fame. She was awarded the 
Nobel prize in 1903 and again in 1911 for her studies in 
chemistry and physics. Annie J. Cannon, winner of the 
Draper Medal for her work in astrophysics at the Na- 
tional Academy of Sciences, won recognition as one of 
the world's leading astronomers. She and her feminine 
associates at Harvard University discovered nearly fi\e 
thousand new stars in a period of forty years. This num- 
ber was nearly two-thirds of all the variable stars that 

318 



liave been identified. Florence Rena Sabin became one 
of the world's outstanding scientists in the study of 
blood and blood diseases. The work of Lise Meitner in 
atomic physics played an important part in the develop- 
ment of the atomic bomb. Other women who rank high 
in the annals of science include Katharine Burr Blodgett 
and Alice Hamilton. 

Women have rarely been given research fellowships or 
scholarships such as are offered men in almost every field 
of science. Often women have had to work hard in order 
to pay for the scientific study they wanted. But today 
there are few large research laboratories which do not 
employ large numbers of women workers. 

In the Arts, women have shown the greatest variety 
of natural gifts. Because of their feeling for personal 
and concrete matters, women have accomplished the 
most in literature. Such novelists as Jane Austen, Char- 
lotte and Emily Bronte, Pearl Buck, WillaCather, George 
Eliot (the pseudonym of Mary Ann Evans), Sigrid Und- 
set, Edith Wharton, and Virginia Woolf rank with the 
great male authors. Women make up more than half the 
successful writers of fiction in contemporary literature. 
Agatha Christie and Mary Roberts Rinehart won fame 
for their mystery and detective stories. Such authors as 
Sara Orne Jewett and Katherine Anne Porter wrote out- 
standing short stories. 

Women have ranked especially high in writing books 
for children and young people. Louisa May Alcott, 
Frances Hodgson Burnett, Selma Lagerlof, Beatrix Pot- 
ter, Johanna Spyri, and Pamela Travers wrote books 
that many generations of children have cherished. 

There have been many good women poets, from 
Sappho in ancient times to Edna St. Vincent Millay, 
Marianne Moore, Edith Sitwell, and others. Women 



have been less successful plawrights until recent times. 
I oda)', many popular plays come from women authors. 
There have been many highly successful actresses. Such 
names as those of Sarah Siddons, Eleonora Duse, Sarah 
Bernhardt, Ellen Terry, Ethel Barrymore, Lynn Fon- 
tanne, and Helen Hayes will live forever in the history 
of the theater. In music, there have been outstanding 
women instmmentalists such as the pianists Myra Hess 
and W'anda Landowska, and a few composers. But 
women singers rank among the leading artists in the 
field. Marian Anderson, Maria Callas, Amclita Galli- 
Curci. Lotte Lehmann, Ernestine Schumann-Heink. 
and Elisabeth Schwarzkopf are among the opera singers 
who have achieved greatness. Great dancers and chore- 
ographers include Agnes De Mille, Martha Graham, 
and Ruth St. Denis. There have also been many talented 
women artists, such as the sculptor Malvina Hofl'man 
and the painters Mary Cassatt, Kathe Kollwitz, and 
Georgia O'Keefe. 

In Sports, many women have made outstanding rec- 
ords. Althea Gibson, Alice Marble, and Helen Wills 
Moody won many prizes for tennis. In golf, "Patty" 
Berg and Mildred "Babe" Didrikson set many course 
records. Florence Chadwick and Gertrude Ederle ex- 
celled in swimming, and Tenley Albright and Barbara 
Ann Scott were outstanding as figure-skaters. 

Women Today in the United States and Canada 

In the United States, the period after World War II 
was marked by indecision on the part of women. Many 
of them were unable to decide between work and family. 
During the war, about eighteen million women were 
part of the labor supply responsible for the production 
of war materiel. Women held important jobs in airplane 
and automobile plants and in instrument factories. 

In 1945 the War Labor Board established the princi- 
ple of giving men and women equal pay for equal work. 
This principle was universally adopted in all industries 
having gov'ernment contracts. Women also joined the 
WAVES, the WACs, the SPARS, and the Marines. 
Kindergartens and nurseries were sponsored by private 
industry in order to make it possible for married women 
to work in factories. Housing projects were de\eloped 
near the plants. Special regulations were set up to pro- 
vide late shopping hours in those communities where 
women workers found it difficult to carry on their func- 
tions as housewives as well as workers. 

The number of women who joined trade unions 
reached a new high during the war. More than half of 
the unions had no women members until the war began. 
Many union contracts established equal pay for ecjual 
work by women. In four out of every five of these con- 
tracts, women were given the same seniority rights as 
men. Women made up one third of the total member- 
ship of the United Automobile Workers. Many other 
unions have large women memberships. 

After the war, many of the jobs held by women were 
taken over by returning servicemen. Many women were 
glad to give up their jobs. But others still had to work 
for a living. These women believed it was essential for 
the nation to provide enough jobs at high enough pay 
to enable them to support themsekes. The program of 
the National Women's Trade Union League empha- 
sized these four "freedoms" of working women: (1) the 
right to work regardless of need, (2) die right to equal 




WMRM T\'. rhi.-aun 

Women in Show Business find many ways to use their talents. 
They may sing, dance, act, or serve as commentators. Here a lead- 
ing television personality conducts her own show. 




Women In Government hold many vital jobs. Their positions 
range from working for the U.S. Weather Bureau, obove, to 
serving in the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives. 



Direct Selling in the home 
is a field in which thousands 
of women are successful. Sin- 
cerity and enthusiasm are qual- 
ities required for this work. 



Women In Executive Posts 

hove proved they can make 
important decisions intelligently 
and efficiently. Many hold 
leading business positions. 




WOMAN 

pay, (3) the right to equal seniority rights, and (4) the 
right to legal safeguards. This program has Ijeen adopted 
by many other women's organizations which are ac- 
tively working for improvement in social legislation. 

Women today play an increasingly important part in 
government and politics. Many women have held 
offices in national, state, and local governments. In the 
1930's, Frances Perkins became the first woman to hold 
a Cabinet post when she was appointed .Secretaiy of 
Labor. Florence Ellinwood Allen became the first woman 
judge of the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in 1934. 
Women have held important posts in the Department 
of .State. As Minister to Denmark, Ruth Br\'an Owen 
became the first woman representative abroad. Eugenie 
Moore Anderson was tlie first woman ambassador (to 
Denmark) and Clare Booth Luce was the first woman 
ambassador to a major country, Italy. Nellie Tayloe 
Ross was the first governor of a state, Wyoming, and 
later became first woman director of the U.S. Mint. 
Ellen Fairclough became Canada's first woman cabinet 
minister when she was named Secretary of State in 1957. 

Oveta Culp Hobby was the first Secretary of Health, 
Education, and Welfare. Georgia Neese Clark became 
the first woman Treasurer of the United States. Others 
active in politics and government included Eleanor 
Roosevelt, Helen Gahagan Douglas of California, and 
Senator Margaret Chase Smith of Maine. 

Women in Other Countries 

In Japan, the position of women was radically 
changed after the declaration of war against China and 
the invasion of Manchuria. As in Germany, Japanese 
women were drafted for work in war plants. Women 
cominonly looked on being drafted as a defense measure. 

Before the war the position of women in Japan was 
a peculiar combination of Oriental and Occidental pat- 
terns. In some respects die Oriental attitude toward 
women was much more liberal than that of Western 
countries. For example, Japan has had 10 empresses 
during its existence as a nation. But the old Japanese 
proverb, "Obedience and modesty are essential virtues 
of the Japanese woman," was translated into laws mak- 
ing women the property first of their parents, and 
then of their husbands. 

When Japan began to expand its industry, however, 
it became necessary to draw upon girls not yet of a mar- 
riageable age for the labor force. Japanese women work- 
ers toiled in textile factories and pottery plants for three 
years. During this time the woman worker was supposed 
to be able to save for herself a dowry large enough to 
enable her to go back to the farming community from 
which she came and secure a husband, or have her fam- 
ily arrange a marriage. Japanese factories adopted the 
dormitory system of housing its female workers within 
the factory walls. The workers had to put up with long 
hours, poor food, unsanitary living conditions, and cruel 
methods of discipline. The first factory act which regu- 
lated conditions of work for women in Japan was 
adopted in 1911, but was not actually put into opera- 
tion until 1916. These factory laws, however, placed the 
responsibility for enforcing conditions upon die em- 
ployer, who often ignored them. 

Japan felt compelled to improve its factory system 



r 

after the first conference of the International Labor Or- ' 
ganization which was held in Washington, D.C., in 
October, 1919. The conference set international stand- 
ards for the employment of women. The length of the 
\\ orking day was reduced for Japanese factory women, 
night work was abolished for women and children, and 
special sanitary measures were introduced. 

The suffrage movement in Japan began in 1925 with 
an organization called the League for Women Suffrage. 
Fusaye Ishikawa was the leader of the movement. It 
met with little success. In 1931 a woman-suffrage bill 
was introduced in the Japanese Diet (congress), but 
was defeated mainly because leaders of tlie Japanese 
army opposed it. The military men declared that 
■'women are born pacifists and if granted the franchise 
\\\\\ oppose war." The movement toward equal rights 
was also hampered by the poor educational facilities for 
women in Japan. There were only two major women's 
colleges, and their facilities were very limited. Few 
Japanese girls even entered high school. 

The attitude of the Japanese government and the 
army changed after the declaration of war on China. 
Leaders recognized that the actual production of guns, 
munitions, and other war needs would depend to a great 
extent upon the cooperation of Japanese women. Even 
the historically famous geisha girl was called upon to 
gi\e up her age-old profession of hostess and entertainer, 
and was placed in occupations in which her delicate 
and \sell&lt;ared-for hands could be used for the produc- 
tion of precision instruments for airplanes and guns. 
The industrialization program probably did more than 
political agitation of suffragists to awaken the Japanese 
woman. .She came to realize that she was first of all an 
essential member of the economic society, and secondly, 
that her age-old role of "obedience" was not in her own 
interests. 

Thus, Japanese women were ready for a new place in 
society after the defeat of their nation and the .-Xllied 
occupation in 1945. Eight months after Allied troops 
took over, Japanese women were taking positions in the 
police forces, as union leaders, and as mechanics in 
skilled and semiskilled occupations. General Douglas 
MacArthur, the head of the occupation forces, stressed 
the importance of die vote in making Japan democratic. 
In the first election, eighty Japanese women were can- 
didates for Parliament, and more dian a third of the 
votes were cast by women. Thirty-six of the feminine 
candidates were elected to seats in the Pariiament. 

The demands of war compelled Japanese women to 
take a political, economic, and intellectual role that 
would have taken years to achieve had not the war oc- 
curred. One result has been that many Japanese women 
want neither household nor factory work. They prefer 
office work. Most Japanese women, however, still cling 
to the conventional pattern of marriage and family. 

In China, women have shown little progress toward 
equality. Educadonal opportunities have been possible 
for only a small percentage of Chinese women. Most 
Chinese women who have received any specialized 
training have come to the United States for it, or have 
attended American schools in China. There are so few 
of these women, however, that their influence has been 
verv weak. And the communist government of China 
has cut off even this source of enlightenment. The mass 
of C:hinesc womanhood remains in a feudal position. 



320 



In the Philippines, the position of woman is probably 
more advanced than in any other Oriental country. The 
original family system of the primitive Filipinos was the 
matriarchy, in which the woman was the head of the 
family. When .Spain conquered the Philippines, women 
were reduced to a subordinate position economically, 
politically, and socially. The women of the lower classes 
had no social or political standing, and enjoyed \ery 
litde in the way of educational or intellectual privileges. 

The pattern of equality for men and women was re- 
established when the United States took control of the 
Philippines. Coeducational schools and universities did 
much to help. Woman suffrage was established in the 
Philippines in 1927. Philippine women were the back- 
bone of the resistance movement when the Japanese 
army o\erran the islands. They fought in die guerrilla 
forces. They worked as nurses and as doctors for the 
loyal fighters, and served in other ways to resist Japa- 
nese domination. 

In France, women were very active in the resistance 
mo\-enients during the war. When the Nazis took over 
the French government, Madame Lucie Aubrac was 
one of the first women to escape from France and go to 
Algiers as a representative of the women of the Free 
French underground. She worked with many of the re- 
sistance organizations, helping French men and women 
to escape German domination. 

Many people believe that the women of the resistance 
movement in France were the logical descendants of the 
women who fought for freedom in the French revolu- 
dons of 1 789 and 1848. In gratitude to the courage and 
dependability of women during the period of Fascist 
rule in France, a law was adopted in 1 944 giving women 
the right to vote in national elections. Before this, they 
had had the right to vote only on local matters. 

In the 1945 elections, the women of France made use 
of their voting rights for the first time. Women were 
elected as mayors in several boroughs, and were chosen 
to sit on juries in many of the special courts which tried 
persons charged with collaborating with the Nazis. 
Many women were elected to the French Assembly. 

In Great Britain, long the center of a hard struggle 
for industrial and political democracy, women were 
granted voting pri\ileges after World War I. During 
World War II, British women were organized into a 
giant labor army for the purpose of carrying on the war. 
There were women representatives in Pariiament, as 
well as women policemen, bricklayers, machinists, and 
bus and taxi dri\ers. The WRENs, WAAFs, and ATS 
were women's organizations under the direction of Brit- 
ish military leaders. Their members flew airplanes, di- 
rected and operated radar equipment, and worked in 
more than 120 trades. 

In the postwar period, however, there were attempts 
to place woman back in her old position. Women were 
asked to give up their jobs to returning veterans, or to 
accept unequal pay for work which had brought them 
higher wage rates during the war. The main fight was 
on the issue of equal pay for equal work. Parliament de- 
feated a measure to establish the same pay for women 
teachers as for men. This occurred in spite of the fact 
that there were a large number of women representa- 
tives in Pariiament, and that the Minister of Health 
and the Minister of Home Security were women. The 
first women sat in the House of Lords in 1 958. 



WOMAN 

In South America, where women have been espe- 
cially new to political action or social responsibilities, 
there has been remarkable progress in the position of 
women. During the war period, women of Brazil, Chile, 
and Mexico made special progress in educational and 
social work. Many women attended Pan American 
conferences, and learned much about the activities of 
women in North America. The woman's vote has be- 
come more important in South America. 

Most of the South American representatives to the 
Inter-American Commission of Women in the summer 
of 1946 discussed not only the problem of equal rights 
but also the particular social questions of concern to 
women. These problems included maternity care, the 
establishment of child-welfare stations, better public 
health facilities, and better education. Theresa Wolfson 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Some Famous Women 
Addams, Jane Lathrop, Julia Clifford 

Aster (Lady) Lyon, Mary 

Austen, Jane Meitner, Lise 

Barrymore (Ethel) Millay, Edna St. Vincent 

Barton, Clara Mitchell, Maria 

Bernhardt, Sarah Nightingale, Florence 

Blackwell, Elizabeth Palmer, Alice E. F. 

Buck, Pearl S. Pandit, Vijaya Lakshmi 

Cannon, Annie Jump Perkins, Frances 

Cassatt, Mary Pinckney (Elizabeth Lucas) 

Curie (Marie) Roosevelt, Eleanor 

Cushman, Charlotte Ross, Nellie Tayloe 

Didrikson, "Babe," Mildred Rossetti, Christina G. 
Duse, Eleonora Sanger, Margaret 

Fontanne, Lynn Schumann-Heink, Ernestine 

Fuller, Margaret Siddons, Sarah Kemble 

Galli-Curci, Amelita Spencer, Anna Garlin 

Glasgow, Ellen Stowe, Harriet E. Beecher 

Godwin (Mary WoUstone- Terry, Ellen Alicia 

craft; Mary Godwin) Undset, Sigrid 
Green, "Hetty," Henrietta Warren, Mercy Otis 
Hale, Sara Josepha Wharton, Edith N. J. 

Hayes, Helen Willard, Emma H. 

Howe (Julia Ward) Willard, Frances E. C. 

Keller, Helen Adams Woolf, Virginia 

Lagerlof, Selma O. L. 

LIncl.\ssified 
Colonial Life in Marriage Woman Suffrage 

America Modeling Woman's Club 

Family Pioneer Life Women's Bureau 

Harem .Seraglio Zenana 

Homemaking 

Outline 

I. The Influence of Women in History 
II. Contributions to Culture 

A. In Social Advancement C. In the .\rts 

B. In the Sciences D. In Sports 

III. Women Today in the United States and Canada 

IV. Women in Other Countries 

A. In Japan D. In France 

B. In China E. In Great Britain 

C. In the Philippines F. In .South .\merica 

Questions 

Why is there a natural disision of labor between men 
and women in many societies? 

What women influenced the development of chem- 
istry? 

Who v\as the first woman to hold a Cabinet post in 
the LInited States? In Canada? 

Why do most women prefer social welfare and psy- 
chology to science and philosophy? 



321 



WOMAN SUFFRAGE 

WOMAN SUFFRAGE, SUF ridge, generally means 
women's right to vote in political affairs. Women have 
always helped to manage the affairs of society. A few 
have been rulers, and many more have had great un- 
official influence. In the growing democracies, women 
usually had no voting rights. But many women found 
that their families and social connections gave them 
better social position than many men who could vote. 

Women's Rights. In .\merica, women were needed to 
help conquer the wilderness and to build a new civiliza- 
tion. An unusually large number of women leaders 
developed. Anne Hutchinson was a Puritan religious 
leader in the 1600's. Catherine Littlefield Greene, of 
Georgia, encouraged Eli Whitney with his cotton gin. 
Anne Royall was a pioneer journalist in the early 
I800"s, though not interested in women's rights. 

Women and Public Affairs. In the colonies, some 
women were taxpayers and "free-born citizens." They 
were able to vote under colonial laws, except in New 
York and Virginia. The Revolutionary' War inspired 
liberal thought on women's rights, but the Continental 
Congress left decisions on suffrage to the states. Only 
the New Jersey constitution gave women the right to 
vote. But the state took it away again in 1807. 

New conditions in the 1830's caused women to agi- 
tate for the right to vote. The factory system created 
a labor force that included women. Men who fought for 
temperance reforms, education, religious liberalism, and 
the abolition of slavery needed the help of women, and 
in return helped them to be heard on public issues. 
Angelina and Sarah Moore Grimke, of a distinguished 
South Carolina family, went north to speak against 
slavery. Radical reformers encotiraged them to make 
public speeches. Abby Kelley, an abolitionist, used 
antislavery meetings to fight for woman suffrage. 

The Woman Suffrage Movement. At the World Anti- 
Slavery Convention of 1840 in London, an effort to 
seat women delegates from the United States was de- 
feated. But reformers continued to work for equal rights 
for women. A small meeting at Seneca Falls, N.Y., in 
1 848, has been called the first woman suffrage conven- 

Woman Suffrage Before the National Amendment. 

Before the adoption of the Nineteenth Amendment to the Consti- 
tution, nineteen states did not permit women to vote, twelve 
states permitted them to vote only in Presidential elections, and 
two states permitted them to vote in primary elections. Only 
fifteen states offered full voting privileges to women. Dates 
shown are the years in which these privileges were granted. 




NONSUFFRAGE 

PRESIDEmiAl SufffiAGE 
I I PRIMAfiY SUFFRAGE 
I ] FULl SUFFRAGE 



tion in the United States. Elizabeth Cady Stanton and 
Lucretia Mott led the meeting, and it excited much 
public discussion. Even more important was the Wom- 
an's Rights Convention, organized by Lucy Stone at 
Worcester, Mass., in 1850. It was a truly national 
assembly of men and women reformers. 

During the next ten years, other women joined the 
crusade. Susan B. Anthony, with Elizabeth Stanton, 
founded the radical National Woman Suffrage Associ- 
ation in May, 1869. It opposed Amendment 15 to the 
Constitution, because this amendment gave the vote to 
Negro men, but not to women. The American Woman 
.Suffrage Association tried more moderately to persuade 
the states rather than the federal government to grant 
women the vote. The two organizations united in 1890 
as the National American Woman Suffrage Association. 
Winning the Vote. The territorial legislature of Wyo- 
ming gave women the right to vote in 1869. This was 
the first such action in the nation's history. Julia Ward 
Howe, Frances E. Willard, Belva Ann Bennett Lock- 
wood, and Anna Howard Shaw kept the cmsade before 
the public. In the 1890's, several states granted suffrage 
to women, and other states became more friendly to the 
cause. World War I required full cooperation from 
women, and gave the suffragists their chance. In 1917, 
when the United States entered the war, a woman 
suffrage amendment was submitted to the House of 
Representatives. By 1919, it had passed both houses of 
Congress, and was soon ratified by the necessary 36 
states. In August, 1920, Amendment 19 to the Consti- 
tution became law. 

Woman Suffrage in Other Countries. Before World 
War I, several countries had given women the vote: 
New Zealand in 1893; Finland in 1906; Norway in 
1907; Australia in 1908; and Denmark and Iceland in 
1915. The war caused many nations to give women the 
vote. Russia did so in 191 7. Canada, Germany, Lu.xem- 
bourg, and Poland followed in 1918. India, Austria, 
Czechoslovakia, and The Netherlands did so in 1919. 
In Great Britain, the battle to win the vote for women 
lasted for more than 40 years. It was led by Emmeline 
G. Pankhurst and her daughters, as well as other famous 
suffragettes and men sympathizers. Great Britain 
granted complete woman suffrage in 1928. 

Other nations fell in line during the 1930's, including 
Brazil, Cuba, Chile, and the Philippines. World War II 
speeded up acceptance of woman suffrage by France, 
Italy, China, Japan, and others. In 1963, women voted 
for the first time in Iran. The LW Commission on the 
Status of Women reported that only nine nations still 
denied all political rights to women. 

Women's associations throughout the world continue 
to work not only for full voting rights, but for related 
rights. For example, they seek equal educational and 
work opportunities for women. In the United States, 
individual women and women's groups advocate an 
Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution to give 
women complete equality under the law. Loms Filler 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Anthony, Susan Brownell Stanton, Elizabeth Cady 
Catt, Carrie Chapman Stone, Lucy 

League of Women Voters United States Constitution 
Lockwood, Belva A. B. (Amendment 19) 

Mott, Lucretia C. Walker, Mary E. 

Pankhurst, Emmeline G. Willard, Frances E. C. 
Shaw, Anna Howard 



322 



WOMAN'S CHRISTIAN TEMPERANCE UNION is an 

international organizaticn of women who believe in 
personal total abstinence &lt;'rom all alcoholic beverages, 
and who work for the abolition of the liquor traffic. The 
Youth Temperance Council (high school and college), 
the Loyal Temperance Legion (grade-school age), and 
the 20 educational departments of work promote the 
organization's broad program. The program includes 
scientific narcotics education, good citizenship, child 
welfare, and wodd peace. The W.C.T.U. has played 
an active part in getting laws passed which provide 
that young people in the public schools be taught the 
scientific facts about what alcohol is and what it does. 
The organization has branches in all the states of the 
Union, and in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. It 
was founded in 1874. The W.C.T.U. grew out of the 
Women's Temperance Crusade of 1873. During this 
campaign, women church members went into saloons, 
sang hymns, prayed, and asked the saloonkeepers to 
stop selling liquor. The Temperance Crusade swept 
over 23 states, and resulted in the closing of thousands 
of places that sold liquor throughout the nation. 

A group of Crusaders attending the Chautauqua Sun- 
day School Assembly in 1874 issued the call which re- 
sulted in the organization of the National Woman's 
Christian Temperance Union in November, 1874, at 
Cleveland, Ohio. Its first president was Mrs. Annie 
Wittenmyer, and the second was the noted educator 
and reformer, Frances E. Willard. 

The organization grew rapidly, and its influence in- 
creased with its growth. It worked through schools, 
churches, and other organized groups. Finally the Eight- 
eenth Amendment to the Constittition of the United 
States (passed in 191 9) prohibited the manufacture, 
import, export, and sale of alcoholic beverages within 
the United States. This amendment remained in force 
between 1920 and 1933, when the Twenty-first Amend- 
ment replaced it. 

In 1883, Miss Willard founded the first intemational 
organization for women, called the World's Woman's 
Christian Temperance Union. It is made up of women's 
temperance groups in 54 countries and has about 
1 ,000,000 members. The international badge, a bow of 
white ribbon, is used in all countries. The W.C.T.U. 
has national headquarters at 1730 Chicago Ave., 
Evanston, 111. Agnes d. hays 

See also Good Templars, International Order of; 
Prohibition; Temperance; Temperance Leaglte of 
America, National; Willard, Frances E. 

WOMAN'S CLUB. Organizations for women, grouped 
according to their objectives, include social clubs, prac- 
tical clubs, political clubs, and professional and business 
clubs. Women's clubs promote clean-up campaigns, 
work for better schools, support social and government 
reforms, and work for world peace. Many women's 
clubs are members of international federations. 

Social Clubs include a great many women's clubs. 
Those that are primarily social were organized to pro- 
vide recreation and opportunities to study literature, 
art, music, and household economy. Social clubs also 
include hobby clubs, sports clubs, and other groups. 
Practical Clubs devote their efforts to various forms 
of service. Some practical clubs have grown from social 
clubs. Many clubs in this group promote activities that 
benefit libraries, community centers, hospitals, social 



WOMAN'S CLUB 

agencies, private schools, and other institutions. Their 
organizations have also helped to bring order and clean- 
liness to local communities and to provide playgrounds 
for children. They cooperate with other organizations 
to extend help beyond their local communities. 

Political Clubs, in the 1900's, waged strong cam- 
paigns to gain for women the right to vote. Later, polit- 
ical clubs turned to the problem of teaching women to 
vote intelligently. Today, political clubs provide courses 
of study for members. They sponsor meetings before 
elections at which candidates state their views on cur- 
rent issues. The clubs also make available to members 
and to the public the records of candidates. 

Professional Clubs, in many instances, embody the 
features of all the other clubs. Their committees carry 
out social activities, as well as programs for community 
welfare, women's rights, education, and benefits for 
charity. Professional clubs developed as an increasing 
number of women entered the professions. Clubs for 
writers, nurses, doctors, lawyers, secretaries, and other 
women's groups, often deal specifically with the needs 
of their members. 

Women's Clubs in Canada have the same general 
groupings as those in the LInited States. Many clubs in 
Canada are members of the same international federa- 
tions to which clubs in the United States belong. 
Canadian clubs include organizations for mothers, rural 
women, presswomen, business and professional women, 
and various others. The Imperial Order of the Daugh- 
ters of the Empire (lODE) has a membership of more 
than 32,000. It promotes patriotism, unity with the 
commonwealth, education, and good citizenship. It has 
chapters in the Yukon, Bermuda, and the Bahamas. 
The Women's Institute has a membership in Canada of 
more than 90,000. Its activities embrace agriculture, 
industry, home economics, and citizenship. 

History. Women have met in groups since the days of 
ancient Rome, when they gathered to discuss such inter- 
ests as ways of etiquette. Some of the first clubs in 
America began as quilting bees or sewing circles. In 
the i8oo's, some women's clubs were organized to 
promote culture, and others to fight slavery. Women's 
clubs today are interested in local and world affairs. 

Related Articles in World Book include: 

Altrusa International Mount Vernon Ladies' 
American Association of Association of the Union 

University Women P.E.O. .Sisterhood 

American Legion Auxiliary Quota Club International 

Business and Professional Soroptimist 

Women's Clubs, National International Association 

Federation of Sorority 

Colonial Dames of Woman's Christian 

America, National Temperance Union 

Society of Woman's Relief Corps, 
Daughters of the American National 

Revolution, National Women's Clubs, General 

Society of Federation of 

Daughters of the Women's Trade Union 

Confederacy, United League of America, 

Gold Star Mothers, National 

American Young Women's Christian 
Hadassah Association 

Junior Leagues of Young Women's Hebrew 

America, Inc., Association 

Association of the Zonta International 
League of Women Voters 



WOMAN'S RELIEF CORPS, NATIONAL 

WOMAN'S RELIEF CORPS, NATIONAL, is the oldest 
woman's patriotic organization in the United States. 
In July, 1883, it was voted the official auxiliaiy of the 
Grand Army of the Republic, an organization of veter- 
ans of the Union Army in the Civil War. The Woman's 
Relief Corps is the only existing patriotic organization 
which was founded solely on the basis of loyal woman- 
hood, regardless of kinship. The organization has head- 
quarters in Springfield, 111. 

The aims of the Woman's Relief Corps were to aid 
and memorialize the Grand Army of the Republic, and 
to perpetuate the memory of its dead. The organization 
also works to assist veterans of all wars of the United 
States. Members of the Woman's Relief Corps try to 
promote universal liberty, ecjual rights, and love of 
country. Eula M. Nelson 

.Sec also Gr.-^nd Arnh' of the Republic. 

WOMBAT is a thickset, burrowing animal, about 3 
feet long. It is a marsupial (a mammal that carries its 
young in a pouch). Wombats live on the island of Tas- 
mania and in southern Australia. Their tough hide with 
its long, coarse fur is used to make long-wearing rugs. 
The fur is yellow-black to gray-brown. Wombats dig 




New York Zoological Society 

The Wombat Uses Its Heavy Claws To Dig Burrows. 

earth burrows. They leave their burrows only at night to 
feed on roots, vegetables, and leaves. Wombats make 
affectionate pets. 

Scientific Classification. Wombats belong to the family 
Phascolomyidae. The common wombat is classified as genus 
Phase olomys. frank b. Gollev 

WOMEN VOTERS, LEAGUE OF. See Le.«lgue of 
\V(iNn:N \'oTERs. 

WOMEN'S AMERICAN ORT is the largest affiliate of 
tlie world-wide Oiuiuiizalion for Rehabilitation through 
Training, or ORT. VVomen's American ORT has more 
than 50,000 members in the United Stales. The wodd- 
wide ORT is a nonprofit agency founded in 1880 to 
free underprivileged and uprooted Jewish people from 
dependence upon charity by teaching them skills and 
trades. It maintains over 500 installations in 19 coun- 
tries on 5 continents. About 30,000 persons a year use its 
high-school credit courses, its short-term apprenticeship 
and adult-training courses, or its junior colleges. Courses 
are geared to the manpower needs of the countries in 
which the schools are located. The ORT program is 



financed by governments, local communities, the Amer- 
ican Jewish Joint Distribution Committee, and by affili- 
ated ORT groups. Women's American ORT has na- 
tional headquarters at 222 Fourth Avenue, New York 
3, J\ .1 . Nathan Gould 

WOMEN'S ARMY CORPS. Sec WAC. 

WOMEN'S BUREAU is a division of the Department 
of Labor. It was created in 1918, and seeks to improve 
the welfare of all working women by studying the prob- 
lems which affect them. The Women's Bureau is a 
policy-forming organization and does not administer 
any laws. It carries out investigations and publishes its 
research findings. 

The problems which most concern the bureau are the 
working conditions of women, their efficiency at work, 
and the opportunities they have for employment. It 
investigates all fields of employment, including manu- 
facturing, service trades, household employment, farm 
work, business and professions, and homemaking. Sur- 
veys are conducted on health questions, wage rates, 
and the financial responsibility of women. The Wom- 
en's Bureau makes recommendations on labor laws 
and regulations affecting women. The organization also 
provides information on working women to the United 
Nations. In addition, the Women's Bureau conducts an 
international training program for women leaders of 
other countries. (oun c. bollens 

WOMEN'S CLUBS, GENERAL FEDERATION OF, is an 
inuiii.iiii)n,il organization of about 1 1,000,000 women 
« ho belong to women's clubs in more than 50 countries. 
This total includes 850,000 members in 1 5,600 clubs in 
the United States. 

The General Federation of Women's Clubs was 
founded in 1890. In that year, Sorosis of New York, one 
of the oldest clubs in the United States, invited dele- 
gates from other clubs to a general convention. This 
meeting set up the framework for the general federation. 
The international headquarters are at 1 734 N St. N.W., 

Washington, D.C. grace D. Nicholas 

Sec also Woman's Club. 

WOMEN'S FRATERNITY. See Sorority. 

WOMEN'S INTERNATIONAL LEAGUE FOR PEACE 
AND FREEDOM. See Addams, Jane. 

WOMEN'S RESERVE. See SPARS; WAVES. 

WOMEN'S TRADE UNION LEAGUE OF AMERICA, 
NATIONAL, was a federation of women interested in 
the American labor movement. It was officially discon- 
tinued in 1950. The organization acted as an informa- 
tion clearinghouse for labor unions, individuals, and 
groups. Fhe Trade Union League was founded in Bos- 
ton in 1903. 

.\t one time, the Trade L'nion League had more than 
1 ,000,000 members. Its chief aim was to organize wom- 
en workers into trade unions. Elisabeth Christman 

WONDER DRUG. .See .\ntibiotic. 

WONDERS OF THE WORLD. See Seven Wonders 
OF THE World. 

WONSAN, ]WN sahn (pop. 112,952; alt. 20 ft.), 
is a large port city on the eastern coast of North Ko- 
rea. For location, see Korea (color map). A narrow 
peninsula opposite the city shelters Wonsan's deep, nat- 
ural harbor. The city serves as a commercial center for 
the surrounding agricultural and gold-mining area. Its 
chief exports include fish, rice, and soybeans. The port 
opened in 1883 to foreign trade. 



324 




Oak 



Cherry 



Walnut 



WOOD is the tough inner portion beneath the bark 
of trees, shrubs, and certain plants. Wood is generally 
called softwood if it comes from a tree which has needle- 
like leaves, such as pine. The broad-leaved Uees. such 
as the oaks, provide what is commonly called hardwood. 
An explanation of how wood grows may be found in 
Tree (The Parts of a Tree). 

The great variety of beautiful designs or patterns 
found in wood is one of the reasons for its wide use in 
cabinet work and furniture making. The pattern, called 
the figure, is different in each type of Wood. In some, 
the figure may be plain. In others, it ma^-be rich. The 
figure is detennined by (1) the way the '-'tree' grows; 

(2) the part of the tree from which the wood is taken; 

(3) the manner in which the wood is sawed. 
Variations in a tree's annual growth rings are revealed 

in the figure of its wood. Uneven distribution of the 
coloring matter in the heartwood causes irregular dark 
and colored streaks. This is called pigmerU figure: It-is- 
found in only a few furniture woods, including the 
walnuts, rosewood, red gum, and Macassar ebony. The 
figure may be influenced by irregularities in the grain, 
or direction of the wood fibers. Distortions in the grain 
often cause the color to change when viewed from differ- 
ent angles. This lively effect is seen in mahogany, satin- 
wood, prima vera, and many other figured woods. Spirals 
and waviness in the grain can result in a mottle or stripe 
figure, as well as vnfiddleback, blister, and bird's eye figures. 
Bird's-eye figure is quite common in maple. It is some- 
times found in birch and ash. 

Crotches, burls or wartlike outgrowths, and stumps of 
trees give characteristic and beautiful figures. The most 
popular stumpwood is American walnut. The most 
highly prized burls include redwood, myrtle, walnut, 
cherry, thuja, ash, and maple. 

Plain-sawed lumber results in better figures in certain 
woods, including ash, elm, chestnut, and all the soft- 
woods. The figure revealed in quarter-sawed lumber is 
better in other woods, such as oak and mahogany. 
Quarter-sawed lumber shrinks less in width and warps 
less than plain-sawed lumber. See Lumber. 

The following hatdwoods are the woods most com- 
monly used for the exposed parts of fuiniture: 

Beech is white or slightly reddish in color. Similar to 
sugar maple in strength, hardness, and shrinkage, but 
has a greater tendency to warp; bends easily. 

Birch (yellow) has white sapwood and reddish-brown 
heartwood. It is strong and hard, and holds shape well. 

Cherry (black) is light to dark reddish-brown. It has a 
natural luster prized by cabinet-makers. 

Chestnut is strong, soft, and light. It glues well, and has 
ver\' little shrinkage or swelling. Adaptable to various 
finishes. Principal uses are for veneered panels. 

Elm bends well but has a tendency to warp; has pleas- 
ing appearance. It is not a first-rank cabinet wood. 

Mahogany varies from pale to deep reddish-brown. 
Used most often in the form of veneer. See Mahogany. 



USES OF WOOD 



51.3% 




25 ]% ^PULPWOOD 



10.8% 




POLES, POSTS, 
PILINGS 



2.0%= OTHER USES 



.3% 




COOPERAGE 



&gt;jai, 



Wood Has Many Different Uses. Most wood is cut into saw 
logs, whicti ore used to make lumber for building materiols, 
furniture, and many ottier products. Pulpwood is ground into all 
kinds of popers and cardboard. 



Maple. .Sugar maple has high strength and hardness. 
Used in furniture of solid construction. Red and silver 
maple are sold as soft maple. Sec Maple. 

Oak is a hard, strong wood with good appearance. 
One of the most commonly used woods. See Oak. 

Red Gum often has a beautiful figure in the hcartu'ood. 
It is softer and weaker than walnut and yellow birch, and 
can be readily worked on woodworking machines. 

Rosewood is hard to work and expensive. Used prin- 
cipally in musical instruments. See Rosewood. 

Sycamore is reddish brown. Similar to red gum in 
strength and hardness but has a tendency to warp. 

Walnut varies from light to dark chocolate-bro%vn and 
is rich in color, with a distinctive figure. Hardness and 
strength are sufficient but not too damaging to wood- 
working tools. See Walnut. murris liepf 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Cellulose Logwood Varnish 

Furniture Plywood Wallboard 

Lignin Stain Woodworking 

Lignum Vitae Tree Woodworking Tool 



325 




Grant Wood won fame for 
his pointings of Middle Western 
scenes. Voung Corn, /eft, painted 
931, is one of his earliest 
regional works. 



WOOD, CLEMENT (1888-1950), an American writer, 
is probably best known for writing the words to the 
songs "De Glory Road" and "Short'nin' Bread." He 
also wrote more than 50 books of poetry, fiction, and 
biography. Wood was born in Tuscaloosa, Ala., and 
was graduated from the University of Alabama in 1909 
and from Yale University in 1911. Carl Niemever 

WOOD, GRANT (1892-1942), an American painter, 
portra\'ed scenes of Midwestern rural life as well as 
simplified, childlike versions of American history. His 
earlier works were unusual in combining photographic 
realism with satirical intent, as in the painting Daughters 
of the Revolution. His American Gothic, painted in 1930, 
brought him immediate fame. This painting appears in 
color in the Painting article. Wood was one of the first 
of the "regionalist" painters in America, along with 
such men as Thomas Hart Benton and John Steuart 
Curry (see Benton, Thomas H.; Curry, John S.). 

Wood was born near Anamosa, Iowa, and was always 
connected with that state. He studied at the Univer- 
sity of Iowa, and later taught there. Milton w. Brown 

See also Washington, George (color picture); 
Wheat (picture. Dinner for Threshers). 

WOOD, JETHRO (1774-1834), a Quaker farmer, pro- 
duced an improved cast-iron plow with removable 
pieces at points of greatest wear. His moldboard design 
remains almost unchanged in plows made since then 
(see Plow [Parts of a Plow]). Wood found that people 
were ready to accept his improvements. Despite a patent 
issued in 1819, unscrupulous infringers used Wood's de- 
sign. He exhausted his inoney and energy in lawsuits, 
but never enjoyed material benefits from his work. He 

was born in Dartmouth, Mass. Richard D. Humphrey 

WOOD, LEONARD (1860-1927), was an American 
soldier and colonial administrator. As military gov- 
ernor of Cuba from 1899 to 1902, he prepared the island 
for independence. He built roads and schools, and 

326 



helped stamp out yellow fever by cleaning up swamps 
and mosquito-ridden areas, making Cuba a more 
healthful place in which to live. 

Wood was born in Winchester, N.H. After graduating 
from Harvard Medical School, he joined the Army 
Medical Corps. He commanded the Rough Riders, a 
famous volunteer regiment in which Theodore Roose- 
velt also served, during the Spanish-American War (see 
Rough Riders). Wood commanded the United States 
forces in the Philippines from 1906 to 1909, and served 
as chief of staff from 1910 to 1914. He urged military 
preparedness during World War I. 

In 1920 there was strong sentiment among Republi- 
cans to nominate Wood for the presidency, but the 
movement failed. He served as governor general of the 
Philippines from 1921 until his death. Nelson m. Blake 

WOOD, ROBERT ELKINGTON (1879- ), an 
American industrial leader and soldier, made Sears 
Roebuck &amp; Company one of the world's largest general 
merchandising firms. Wood joined Sears Roebuck as a 
vice-president. He persuaded the mail-order firm to en- 
ter the retail field. He became president in 1928 and 
chairman of the board in 1939. He retired in 1954, but 
continued as a board member. Wood was born in 
Kansas City, Mo. He was graduated from the United 
States Military Academy in 1 900. As a brigadier general 
in World War I, he was quartemiaster and bought 

millions of dollars of .supplies. Harold F. Williamson 

WOOD, ROBERT WILLIAMS (1868-1955), was an 
American experimental physicist. His principal interest 
was in spectmm analysis of metallic vapor (see Light 
[Spectrum Analysis]). His experiments with sodium 
vapor contributed to the development of new theories 
about the structure of matter. He pioneered in the 
development of color photography. Wood was bom at 
Concord, Mass. He was graduated from Harvard Uni- 
versity. Richard D. Humphrey 



WOOD ALCOHOL is a useful industrial chemical. It 
is also called wood spirit, methyl alcohol, or methanol. It 
should not be confused with ethyl alcohol, used in 
alcoholic beverages. Wood alcohol paralyzes the optic 
nerve, and ma\' cause blindness or death if swallowed. 

Wood alcohol is widely used as a solvent fa chemical 
that dissolves other substances). Industries also use it to 
make other chemicals. Wood alcohol is sometimes used 
in airplane fuels and antifreezes. It is usually prepared 
by reacting carbon monoxide and hydrogen. 

Wood alcohol is the simplest member of the alcohol 
class of organic compounds. It is a colorless, flammable 
liquid that has a distinctive odor. It mi.xes readily with 
water. Its chemical formula is CH3OH, and it boils at 
64.5° C. (149° F.). E. Campa.cse 

.See also .-Vlcohol; Methyl. 

WOOD ANEMONE, uh .\E.\I oh nee. is an attractive 
perennial plant grown chiefly in rock gardens. The 
wood anemone, often called the wind/lower, grows in 
Europe. .Siberia, and in the eastern part of the United 
States. The root of the wood anemone is a tuber, which 
is thick and fleshy like a potato. The plant has a single 
whorl of leaves near the base of the stem. Its white 
flowers make up the showy parts of the plant. They 
appear cup-shaped and grow singly. The plant grows 
best in moist, sandy soil. It is reproduced by seeds or 
root cuttings. 

Scientific Classification. The wood anemone belongs 
to the crowfoot family, Ranujiculaceae. It is genus .Anemone. 
The .\merican species is .4. quinquejolia, and the Euro- 
pean species is .4. nemorosa. Theodor just 

See also Anemone. 



WOOD CARVING 

WOOD-BLOCK PRINT. See Block Printing; Hoku- 
s.Ai K.\rsrsHiK.\ (picture); J.\panese Print. 

WOOD BORER. .See Beetle (Kinds of Beetles; color 
picture). 

WOOD BUFFALO NATIONAL PARK. .See Can.ada 
(National Parks). 

WOOD CARVING. For at least 5,000 years, men 
have carved ornaments, figures, or useful objects from 
wood. Wood carvings may decorate the surface of an 
object, such as a door panel or a chest. The wood carver 
may also make separate objects 10 stand alone. This is 
called car\'ing in the round. 

How the Wood Carver Works. The easiest woods for 
the wood carver to cut and finish are basswood. white 
pine, black walnut, and mahogany. Other good woods 
for carving include oak. beech, holh', sycamore, and 
redwood. The wood should be well seasoned and have 
a smooth texture and color. A master carver often uses 
wood burls or knotted wood which produce a beautiful 
surface pattern when properly finished. 

Tools .\eeded. Wood carving need not require many 
tools. One or two ver\' sharp knives and a sharp chisel 
will do for the beginner. .\ penknife makes the best tool 
for car\-ing small objects. For larger pieces, a jackknife 
or hunting knife is needed. The blades must be of good 
steel, and must be kept as sharp as a razor if results 
are to be good. 

How to Cut the Jfood. The beginner should practice 
his strokes on a piece of soft wood about one fourth inch 
or three eighths inch thick. -An outline of a simple de- 



The Art of Wood Carving is thousands of years old. An Egyp- 
tian figure, left, was carved of cedar nearly 4,000 years ago. The 



Chinese figure, center, dotes from the Ming dynasty. The figure 
of a girl, right, is a modern prize-winning ebony carving. 

ThL- .Mc-li.ir.i.litaii .Museum of An. .\ew York 





327 



WOOD DUCK 

sign should be drawn on the face of the wood. Then the 
figure is carved out, stroke by stroke. The second piece 
may be of thicker wood, with the edges rounded off. 
Then a simple figure may be carved in full. To do this, 
the carver selects or cuts a block of wood in the size 
needed. He draws a separate view of the figure in out- 
line on each side. First he carves out the front and back, 
and then the sides. Simple lines cut with single strokes 
are best. The sharp edges of the stroke are left to help 
show the planes of the figure. 

History of Wood Carving. ^Vood can/ing is one of the 
oldest arts. Wood carvings have been found in Egypt 
which were made about 5,000 years ago. The Bible also 
mentions its use. Historical accounts tell of Greek wood 
carvings from very early times. The wood carvers of the 
Middle Ages helped to decorate many of the great 
cathedrals. 

Many artists of the Renaissance carved in \\ood as 
well as in stone. One of the greatest wood carvers was 
Grinling Gibbons (1648-1720), who carved the stalls 
of Saint Paul's Cathedral in London. 

After the middle of the 1800's, wood carving attracted 
less interest. But, in Switzerland, Austria, and southern 
Germany, many craftsmen still carve wood as a regular 
occupation. Fine wood carving is also done by some 
aitists in America, as well as in Europe. Artists in the 
Far East have long done fine carving. Many persons 

carve wood as a hobby. William M. Milliken 

See also C.'iRNaNG; Furniture. 

WOOD DUCK is a colorful bird that lives in the woods 
of southern Canada and throughout the United States. 
The male is the most colorful of North American ducks. 
Its upper feathers glitter with green, blue, and purple. 
I- nderneath, it is red, yellow, and white. Females are 
brown above and yellowish below. Both males and 
females have large crests. The birds measure about 20 
inches long, and have short necks and long tails. 

Wood ducks spend much time in ponds and streams 
near woods. They go into the woods for nuts and in- 
sects. They nest in hollow trees, sometimes 40 feet from 
the ground, and usually in the woods away from water. 
The female lays 8 to 15 creamy-white eggs. Wood 
ducks nearly died out, but now seem to be coming back. 

Scientific Classification. The wood duck is a member 
of the surface duck family, Anatidae. It is classified as 
genus Aix^ species A. sponsa. Joseph j. hickey 

See also Bird (color picture, Wild Ducks); Duck. 

WOOD IBIS. See Stork. 

WOOD LOUSE, or Sow Bug, is a small flat animal 
with seven pairs of legs. It is a cmstacean, related to the 
crab and the lobster. It lives in the bark of trees, old 
wood, or under stones, and can roll itself up into a ball. 
A form that lives in the sea, thegribble, is extremely de- 
stmctive to the timber of piers and ships. 

Scientific Classification. The common wood louse be- 
longs to the family Omscidae. It is genus Oniscus, species 
U. asellus. The gribble is Limnoria lignorum. 

See also Crust.'^cean. 

WOOD MEASURE. See Weights and Measures. 
WOOD MOUSE. See White-Footed Mouse. 
WOOD NYMPH. See Butterfly (Kinds of Butter- 
flies; color picture). 

WOOD NYMPH, in mythology. See Dryad. 

328 




Olin Svi^.Tll rettLnsUI, Jr. 

The Wood Pewee Sings at Daybreak and at Twilight. 

WOOD PEWEE is a small bird related to the flycatcher. 
It nests in the summer in Canada and the eastern 
United States, and spends the winters in Central and 
South America. It is sometimes called the Eastern 
pewee. The Western pcicee resembles it, but has a different 
song. 

The wood pewee looks somewhat like the phoebe, 
but has a grayer brown coloring, and white bars on its 
wings. Its plaintive call sounds somewhat like pee a wee. 
The pewee sings at the first sign of daybreak, and also 
in the early evening when shadows begin to fall. 

The wood pewee builds one of the daintiest nests. It 
weaves various plant fibers together tightly and covers 
the outside with lichens. The bird places its nest on a 
horizontal limb of a tree. The female lays two to four 
eggs, colored a creamy white and speckled with brown. 
It is useful because it eats many insects. 

Scientific Classification. The wood pewee belongs to 
the ilycatciier family, I yrarmidae. It is classified as genus 
Cnntijpus. species C. virejis. Arthur a. Allen 

WOOD PULP. See Paper. 

WOOD RAT. See Pack Rat. 

WOOD SPIRIT. See Wood Alcohol. 

WOOD THRUSH. See Bird (color picture, Favorite 
Songbirds); Thrush. 

WOOD TICK. See Tick. 

WOOD-WIND INSTRUMENT. See Music; Orchestra. 

WOODBINE. See Honeysuckle; Virginia Creeper. 

WOODBURY COLLEGE. See Universities and Col- 
leges (table). 

WOODCHUCK, sometimes caWcd ground hog, is a small 
mammal of North America. A comtnonly held super- 
stition says that this animal can predict the weather. It 
states that the ground hog comes out of his burrow on 
Febman' 2 to observe the weather. If he sees his shadow, 
he decides that spring is still six weeks away, and crawls 
back in to sleep a few more weeks. The superstition has 
no basis in fact, except that the woodchuck does hiber- 
nate during the winter and it does live in a burrow. See 
Ground-Hog Day. 

Several species of woodchucks live in North America. 
The comnwn ground hog of the Eastern States and Canada 
is about 15 to 18 inches long. It has long, coarse fur of 
blackish or grayish color above and chestnut-red below. 
Its legs are short and thick, and its tail is bushy. It has a 
broad, flat head and long whiskers. 

The woodchuck usually makes its home on the edge 
of a sparsely wooded place. It digs its burrow so that it 
contains several compartments, or "rooms." When the 



woodchuck burrows, it digs the dirt with the sharp 
claws of its front feet. It scrapes the dirt out with its 
liind feet. 

The woodchuck becomes a pest when it Hves near 
farms. Such crops as red clover, alfalfa, and early garden 
vegetables are among its favorite foods. The animal also 
carries the ticks and fleas that spread spotted fe\-er and 
plague. 

When the woodchuck leaves home to look for food, it 
first squats on its haunches before the entrance to its 
burrow and takes a survey of the neighborhood. It looks 
and listens in all directions for any sign of danger. If the 









tm 


■ Jh 




: 1? . 




t ^ 




^\ ' 


MB 


i 




k 




d 




Wi-^ 








pll 








ggB.'* .' ' ' •-'.►;' }!' - 








EwRiy.* \ "j/' !-^i»-\ " 




^^P^sV^^R^^K 




f^^/f'''^' ■ 




/. .jB 




w^ 


/ 



He Sees His Shadow, but the woodchuck, popularly called the 
ground hog, is not a dependable weather forecaster. 

way is clear, it then bounds off to the field or garden. 
Woodchucks do not lay up stores of food for winter, but 
they eat tremendous amounts toward the end of sum- 
mer. This extra food in their bodies produces fat which 
keeps them nourished during their winter's sleep. 

One species of woodchuck in the Western .States in- 
jures crops so much that the Fish and Wildlife .Sei-vice of 
the Department of the Interior is tr&gt;ing to control it 
through the use of poison gas. In Washington, residents 
killed 15,000 of these woodchucks in one area of 10 
square miles. Most woodchucks have no economic 
value. Their flesh does not have a good flavor, and their 
hair is too coarse to make good fur. 

Scientific Classification. The .American woodchuck 
belongs to the squirrel family Sciuridae. It is genus 
Marmota, species monax. Stanley p. youno 

WOODCOCK is the name of a group of birds in the 
snipe familv. These birds live in moist woods and shel- 
tered bogs in many parts of the world. The American 
woodcock lives in the eastern United States and southern 
Canada. It is about 1 1 inches long, and has a heavy 



WOODCUT 

body. It has short legs and tail, and a long bill with a 
sensitive tip. The woodcock uses its bill to search for 
earthworms in the mud. It leaves little groups of holes 
in the ground where it pulls out worms. 

The American woodcock flies south to Missouri, New 
Jersey, and the Gulf Coast in winter. It comes north 
again in early spring, appearing by the first of March. 
The bird lives on the groimd in the woods, and makes 
nests of dn,' leaves. The female lays four tannish and 
reddish-bro\vn eggs. Woodcocks are wood brown in 
color with black bars. These colors make the bird blend 
with its background in the thickets and help protect it 
from its enemies. 

The cock performs its courtship flight for the hen in 
the late evening hours or on moonlit nights. After the 
young birds are born, the woodcock sometimes carries 
them by holding them firmly between its thighs as it 
flies. 

Scientific Classification. Woodcocks belong to the 
family Scolopacidae. The .American woodcock is genus 
Philohela, species minor. Alfred m. Bailey 

See also Bird (color pictiu'c, Game Birds). 

WOODCRAFT LEAGUE OF AMERICA was organized 
in 1902 by Ernest Thompson .Seton, a famous nature 
writer. Since that time, the organization has spread to 
many parts of the world. The league has its training 
center in .Seton Village, a 2,500-acie tract at Santa Fe, 
N. Mex. Its executive offices are in Los Angeles, Calif. 
The center offers leadership training to Woodcraft 
members as well as to members of other recreational 
organizations. Julu m. Seton 

See also Seton, Ernest Thompson. 

WOODCUT is a block of wood with a picture or 
design cut on its surface. It is used for making woodcut 
prints. The printed pictures and designs are also called 
woodcuts. 

To make the woodcut, the artist draws his picture, 
or design, on the wooden block. With a sharp knife, 
he cuts away the parts of the surface that are not to 
show in the printed picture. 

To make the woodcut print, the artist inks the de- 
signed surface of the block and lays a sheet of paper on 
it. He rubs the entire surface of the paper slowly and 
evenly with the back of an ordinary spoon or a wood 
burnisher. Only the inked design is transferred to the 
paper, and the result is a woodcut print. 

Blocks for woodcuts are made from wood that is cut 
with the grain, or plankwise from the tree. Pine or any 
soft wood is recommended for making the blocks. A 
diff'erent process is involved in making wood engrav- 
ings. The wooden blocks are usually made from box- 
wood, and the end grain is used for the engraving sur- 
face. The work of engraving is done with a burin or 
graver. Wood engravings are made with finer lines than 
woodcuts, and can have halftone effects (see Half- 
tone). 

The woodcut process is the oldest known of the 
graphic arts. It originated sometime during the 700's 
in China, where woodcut prints were used to illustrate 
books. Woodcuts were introduced in Europe in the 
1400's. At that time, they were used chiefly for making 
religious pictures. Woodcuts appeared in .America late 
in the 1600's, when they were used to make illustra- 



IMPORTANT 

STEPS IN MAKING 

A WOODCUT 



leVV^ 



The GraverSf the tools used to make woodcuts, are, 
left to right, o gouge, v-tool, chisel, and knife. 






The Artist uses the gravers to cut out his design Next, he runs on inked roller over the raised 

on a solid block of wood, above. design so that he con take a print from it, above. 

He Transfers the Design to paper by rubbing He Then Pulls the Finished Print from 

the bock of the paper with a steel tool, below. the inked board and puts it oside to dry, below. 



The Art Instituto of Chicago 

Albrecht Diirer carved the 
woodcut. The four Horsemen 
of the Apocalypse, above. 

Antonio Frasconi made the 
fishing ship woodcut, below, in 
the step-by-step process, left. 



ouitesy Antonio Frasconi 





tions for printed matter and lettering on handbills and 
in newspapers. Today they are one of the most popular 

forms of fine arts. Antonio Frasconi 

See also Dijrer, Albrecht; Engraving (Wood En- 
graving); HoKUSAi Katsushika (picture); Ward, Lynd 
Kendall. 

WOODEN, JOHN. See Basketball (Great Basketball 
Players and Coaches). 

WOODEN HORSE. See Trojan Horse. 

WOODEN SHOE is a type of footwear worn chiefly by 
persons who live in the moist lowlands of The Nether- 
lands. These shoes, called klompen by the Dutch, keep 
feet drier and warmer than other types. Persons in parts 
of France and Belgium also wear wooden shoes. People 
rarely wear wooden shoes indoors. They line them in a 
row outside the door. 

WOODHENGE. See Stonehenge. 

WOODMEN OF AMERICA, MODERN, is a fraternal 
benefit society. The society's principal services center 
in a youth development program. It also grants polio 
benefits without extra cost to its premium-paying bene- 
ficial members. The organization was founded at 
Lyons, Iowa, on Jan. 5, 1883. It has about 460,000 
members. Total payments to families of deceased and 
living members exceed $835,000,000. The organization 
maintains its headquarters at 1504 Third Ave., Rock 

Island, III. Henry R. Freitag 

WOODMEN OF THE WORLD is the name of a frater- 
nal life insurance company. It was founded in Denver, 
Colo., in 1890. The organization insures members in 
California, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Ore- 
gon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming. 

Since 1890, the Woodmen paid out more than 
$ 1 26,000,000 in insurance benefits. Many local branches 



throughout the West give insurance protection to thou- 
sands of families. The organization has headquarters at 
1447 Tremont PI., Denver, Colo. Arthur J. Barrett, Jr. 

WOODPECKER is a bird that uses its strong, chisel- 
like bill to bore holes in trees in search of insects. Wood- 
peckers live in all parts of the world except Australia 
and Madagascar. Most woodpeckers have their toes so 
arranged that they can cling to the sides of trees and 
branches, and climb up and down the trunks. Two of 
these toes are pointed forward and two are pointed 
backward. The birds have stiff tail feathers. They use 
the tail as a support while they cling to a tree trunk. 
Woodpeckers have long tongues, usually with barbed, 
horny tips. They thrust out these tongues to spear insects 
and draw them out of hiding places in the wood. The 
tongues of woodpeckers are coated with sticky saliva 
which helps them gather up small insects such as ants. 
The birds also eat berries, fmits, and nuts. 

The Mating Call. Woodpeckers have harsh voices. 
Their mating call is a rapid drumming, performed by 
striking the bill on a dead limb or other resounding 
surface. Their feathers are usually barred or spotted 
black and white, or brown and black. The male may 
have red or yellow markings on the head. 

The birds make holes in the trunks of trees for their 
nests, and leave fine chips of wood on the bottom to 
cushion the eggs. The young are hatched featherless. 
Woodpeckers rarely are seen in groups, except in the 
fall, when families roam the woods together. The sap- 
sucker is the only woodpecker that sometimes harms 
trees. 

Types of Woodpeckers. One of the woodpeckers, 
called the ivory-billed woodpecker, is one of the rarest 
birds in North America. It is a large, wild, shy bird with 



330 



a high, scarlet crest. It lives in the virgin forests of the 
Southern States. The pileated woodpecker is another 
North American bird. It is somewhat smaller than the 
ivor\'-billed, and is still common in the forests. The 
yellow-bellied sapsucker and Xhcflicker, which is often seen 
around buildings as it eats ants on the ground, are also 
North American woodpeckers. The redheaded woodpecker 
has striking red, white, and bluish-black feathers. The 
hairy woodpecker and the downy woodpecker both live 
throughout the year in the Northern States and Canada. 
The small downy woodpecker is the most common 
woodpecker. The black woodpecker lives on the Pacific 
Coast of North America. The red-bellied woodpecker is 
also called the zebra woodpecker because of its black and 
white stripes. 

The green woodpecker is a brightly colored bird of 
Europe. The great-spotted woodpecker is a handsome bird 
that looks like the hairy woodpecker. It lives in Europe 
and Asia Minor. The ground woodpecka lives in South 
Africa. It feeds on the ground and digs its nest in clay 
banks. 

Scientific Classification. Woodpeckers are in the 

family Picidae. The ivory-billed is genus Campephilus, 
species C. principalis: the pileated is Dryocopus pileatus; and 
the redheaded is Melanerpes erylhroccphalus. The hairy 
woodpecker is genus Dendrocopos, species D. villosus; and 
the downy is D. pubescens. Arthur a. Allen 

See also Bird (color pictures, Birds That Help Us; 
Bird Nests; Types of Beaks; T)pes of Feet); Flicker; 
Sapsucker; Wryneck. 



WOODSTOCK COLLEGE 

WOODROW WILSON SCHOOL OF PUBLIC AND IN- 
TERNATIONAL AFFAIRS. Sec Princeto.n University. 
WOODS, LAKE OF THE. See Lake of the Woods. 
WOODS HOLE OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTITUTION is 

a research and study center for marine science on Cape 
Cod, at Woods Hole, Mass. The institution has a land 
laboratory and several research ships that explore in the 
North Atlantic and inshore. They collect information 
on the ocean and its animal and plant life. About 100 
university investigators and graduate students work in 
the laboratoiy or on the ships in summer. The insti- 
tution also works with the International Commission 
for the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries. This commission 
was established in 1951 by the United States and four 
other countries to preserve the North Atlantic fishing 
industry. The \\'oods Hole Oceanographic Institution 
was founded in 1930. Jan Hahn- 

WOODS INDIANS is another name for Indians of the 
eastern woodlands. See Indian, American (Eastern 
Forests Indians; color pictures). 

WOOD'S METAL. .See Allov(How Alloys Are Made). 

WOODSTOCK COLLEGE has a men's school in arts 
and sciences and a graduate theological seminary. The 
senior division is at Woodstock, Md., and the junior 
division at Wernersville, Pa. Only members of the Jesuit 
order of the Roman Catholic Church may attend the 
college. Woodstock College was founded in 1869. For 
enrollment, see Universities and Colleges (table). 




The Red-Bellied Woodpecker, obove, is most com- 
monly found in the eastern and southern states. 



The Hairy Woodpecker, below, is about 9'/2 inches 
long. It looks much like the downy woodpecker. 





The Pileated Woodpecker, left, has a large crest on its head. 
The block woodpecker, right, is also called Lewis's woodpecker. 




Amherst Central Junior High School 

Woodworking Classes in Schools introduce students to the ancient craft of 
making things from wood. The students learn to use tools to moke useful items. 



WOODWORKING. The making of useful and decora- 
tive articles from wood is one of the oldest crafts, and is 
one of our most important industries today. Wood- 
working is generally defined as the forming and shaping 
of wood for the outside and inside of all types of build- 
ings and structures, and the making of furniture and 
other articles. The framework construction of a wooden 
building is done by a woodworker commonly called a 
carpenter (see Carpentry). The hand carving of such 
fine objects as musical instmments and statues is 
called wood carving. See Wood Carvemg. 

Woodworking today is part of several important in- 
dustries. In the building industry, woodworkers known 
as finishers put the finishing touches to the inside and 
outside of houses. Interiors call for the most skillful 
woodwork, involving the installation of panels and 
moldings, stairways, door and window frames, fancy 
partitions, built-in cabinets, and similar work. Wood- 
workers employed in factories make many of the things 

A Power Sander does a swift job of shaping and smoothing 
wood. Tools like this make woodworking fun in home workshops. 

The Dow Chemical Co. 




which carpenters can install complete such as doors, win- 
dow frames, and sills. The furniture industry uses highly 
skilled woodworkers. Many metalworking industries 
also employ woodworkers, known as patternmakers, 
who make wood patterns from which metal castings are 
made. The automobile industry also uses some wood- 
workers. Woodworking is a very popular hobby. 

Woodworking as a Hobby 

The thing made by the hobbyist may be simple 
enough for a small boy to make, or so difficult that it taxes 
the skill of the most experienced workman in wood. 

One great reason for the popularity of amateur wood- 
working is the extremely wide range of projects the 
woodworker may choose from, even if he does not pos- 
sess many tools. Many simple, useful things — such as 
garden furniture, birdhouses, and rough shelves — may 
be built with nothing more than a hammer and saw. 
At the other extreme is the completely equipped shop 
whose owner has invested hundreds of dollars in his 
hobby. 

There are a number of monthly publications devoted 
entirely to home woodworking and other crafts. Other 
publications have departments carrying plans and de- 
signs for woodworking projects. These are very helpful 
for both the beginner and the advanced craftsman. 
Plans may also be obtained from many other sources, 
such as the manufacturers of woodworking tools, shop 
equipment, and plain and fancy lumber. 

Care of Tools. Both hand and machine woodworking 
tools such as the lathe are described in the article Wood- 
working Tool. As that article points out, these tools 
may range from a few primary ones to elaborate and 
complete sets. But the best tools will give poor service 
and results unless they are cared for. The amateur wood- 
worker should provide a box or wall rack where tools 
may he kept. Otherwise tools are likely to be mislaid 
and lost, or put in places where the cutting edges are 
nicked and dulled or become msty. 

Tools must be kept sharp. It is far easier to do a work- 
manlike job with a sharp tool than with a dull one. If a 
little light machine oil is wiped on the metal parts from 



time to time, rust caused by perspiration of the hands 
or damp air will not form. 

Kinds of Wood to Use. .Almost all boxes and ordinary 
wood scraps are softwood which can be sawed, planed, 
chiseled, or drilled easily. The most common softwood 
— and one of the best — is white pine. Most lumber- 
yards stock it. Clear white pine is more expensive, but 
is the best for woodworking purposes. It should be used 
for the better projects such as cabinets, small tables, and 
similar pieces. C)'press also works well, and is usually 
easy to get. California redwood is an excellent long- 
lasting wood that is ideal for birdhouses, lawn furniture, 
or similar articles that will be exposed to the weather. 
Basswood is another favorite. 

Of the hardwoods, oak is the cheapest, most avail- 
able, and easiest to work. It is also easy to finish. It 
takes stain, varnish, and wax well, and does not show 
up slight defects through a polished surface as many of 
the more expensive hardwoods do. Walnut, maple, 
birch, and mahogany are other woods the craftsman 
will have occasion to use as he becomes more skilled. 
These woods are often used in fine furniture and cab- 
inetmaking, and require very exact workmanship. 

Plans and Measurements. In any woodworking proj- 
ect, it is best to make a plan or working drawing of the 
article to be made. With such a drawing you can see at 
once if proportions and dimensions are correct and, if 
not, they should be changed. The drawing is also help- 
ful in selection of wood sizes. 

Unless you lay out a piece of work accurately, you 
will not be able to turn out a satisfactory job because 
the pieces will not fit together. Use a rule and a square 
and check all measurements as you go along. NIark 
lines on the wood with a very sharp, hard pencil, or bet- 
ter yet, with a knife. Check all surfaces with the try 
square to make certain they are true after cutting. 

Types of Projects. There are simple projects that can 
be made in an e\ening. Others require hundreds of 




^"1 


-I- ~ ^~r 


i =2^ 


i -' T 


J- T i 


Zl. it it 








^ 


j"s(?l/^/!SJ 


' 1' 


T~S 






- 5 


-. ^, 


:_ i^ 


\—sf-^ 



Plans for a Small Wall Shelf show the dimensions and pro- 
portions of the woodworking project described in this article. 



WOODWORKING 

hours to complete. The beginner should start with 
things that test his ability to use his tools: to saw along 
a line, plane a smooth, flat surface, or use a chisel in 
making a simple joint. .Among the easiest projects are 
small shelves, towel and necktie racks, stands to hold 
plants, and similar objects. As the craftsman's skill with 
tools increases, he may undertake more difficult proj- 
ects, such as a footstool, a book rack, or a bench. 

A Woodworking Project 

The materials and method of construction for a small 
wall shelf follow: 

Materials f.AU white pine) 

2 pieces i"X5^"X2U"— sides 

3 pieces ^"X5-j"X9"^shelves 

1 piece i'XS" X9" — top piece 
1 piece i"X^^"X')" — bottom piece 

Directions 

(i ) Saw and plane the pieces to exact sizes. 

(2) Smooth pieces with sandpaper. 

(3) .Assemble parts as shown in the diagram, using 
6-penny finish nails. Drive nails below surface of wood 
with nail set and fill holes with plastic wood. 

(4) Sandpaper assembled shelf with fine sandpaper. 

(5) Paint with primer paint and allow to dry for 24 
hours. 

(6) Smooth primer by again sandpapering lightly. 

(7) .Apply enamel and allow to dry for 48 hours, 
then apply second coat. 

(8) Remove any roughness with fine sandpaper, fine 
steel wool, or pumice stone and oil. 

History of Woodworking 

The woodworker evidendy has been a respected man 
in the community from the earliest times. The royal 
jixman of ancient Egypt held a vet)' important post, 
because he had charge of all the builders. It is claimed 
that while ordinary workers of the king were paid in 
barlev, the woodworkers were paid in silver. The tomb 
of Tutankhamen, twelfth ruler of the eighteenth Egyf&gt;- 
tian dynasty, who lived about 1370- 1352 b.c, contained 
hundreds of artistic pieces made by woodworkers. 

As man improved die tools with which he worked, 
homes, palaces, churches, and temples became more 
stately and beautiful. The churches still in existence in 
Europe show how expert the workman had become. 
Much of the interior was of wood, and this gave the 
woodworker a real opportunity to show how good a 
craftsman he was. The furniture also was made of wood, 
and the best type of workmanship is displayed. 

The beautifully carved statues, crosses, pulpits, and 
choir stalls found in the monasteries, convents, churches, 
basilicas, and cathedrals erected in Europe during the 
Middle .Ages show how expert woodworkers had be- 
come. Later, one organization of woodworkers had the 
exclusive right to make measuring cups, paUs, wheels, 
shovels, and all the fittings, such as blocks, for ships. 

The value of wood for these purposes is shown by the 
fact that parts of dwellings, temples, pieces of furniture, 
tool handles and the like made of wood hundreds and 
thousands of years ago are still in existence. Those who 
love wood and work with wood have every reason to be 
very proud of their choice. joh.-j j. metz 

.See also Carpentry; Wood; Wood Carving. 



333 




Oilstone 



Marking Gauge 



Block Plane 



Jack Plane 



Hobbyists Use Many of these Common Woodworking Tools in Home Worlcshops. 



WOODWORKING TOOL. The family of woodworking 
tools is very large. It has been growing ever since primi- 
tive man began to look at every stone or shell to see 
whether he could use it for cutting, splitting, scraping, 
piercing, or shaping pieces of wood. 

Some of the woodworking tools that have been found 
in caves date as far back as from 500,000 to 8,000 years 
before Christ. The tools were made during the period 
commonly known as the Old Stone Age (see Stone 
Age). They consisted of chipped or flaked pieces of flint 
made much as the American Indians made their stone 
arrowheads, knives, spearheads, and tomahawks. 

Later, New Stone Age man learned how to use one 
stone to grind a softer stone so as to produce a tool which 
worked better and looked better than those of the Old 
Stone Age. 

Our museums still have many tools which date from 
these early periods. They are very clumsy, but we must 
not forget diat the men who produced them were the 
first designers of tools. They made it possible for those 
who came after them to make improvements imtil man 
had passed through the Bronze Age and the Iron Age, 
and arrived at the excellent tools which we who live in 
the Steel Age now use. 

Modern Power Woodworking Tools 

When we stand before the large power machinery in 
the mill room of a factory, it is diflficult for us to imagine 



that these swiftly moving machines are merely improve- 
ments made on the crude woodworking tools produced 
by our ancestors thousands of years ago. Yet these mar- 
velous machines perfonn the same operations as did 
those old clumsy stone tools. However, modern machines 
do the jobs much more perfectly and hundreds of times 
more quickly. 

The Circular Saw is one of the most useful of all of 
the woodworking machines. The first one of these was 
invented in England in 1777. It consists of a table 
mounted on a base through which the circular disklike 
saw blade projects. The saw is mounted on a shaft which 
is usually driven by a motor. The table is equipped with 
a steel cutoff gauge against which the wood must be 
held for crosscutting. There also is a ripping fence which 
is used for ripping, or cutting the wood lengthwise with 
the grain. 

The Band %avt is another very useful tool. This tool 
was invented in England in 1808. The band saw con- 
sists of a thin, narrow, flexible, endless piece of steel into 
which saw teeth have been cut. This saw is mounted on 
die rims of two rubber-covered pulleys, mounted one 
above the other. The lower of these pulleys is revolved 
by a motor. This causes the band saw to run at a great 
speed between one set of guides set above the cutting 
table and another set of guides beneath the table. 
Large heavy band-saw blades are used for cutting logs 
into boards, and the thin narrow band saws are used 



334 



for sawing furniture and also for ornamental work. 

The Jig Saw may be looked upon as being a litde 
brother of the band saw. It uses much finer blades, and 
can be used for cutting out delicate work. 

The Jointer is a much-used machine which was in- 
vented in England in 1793. The wood that is to be 
planed rests on a table in the center of which a cutter- 
head revolves with great speed. The table can be raised 
and lowered so that the thickness of the shaving can be 



HAND TOOLS 



i6-ounce claw hammer 
22-inch, lo-point 
crosscut saw 
24-inch, 6j-point 
ripsaw 

coping saw with one 
dozen blades 
14-inch iron jack plane 
block plane 

combination miter and 
try square 
6-foot folding rule 
12-inch, 8-point 
compass saw 
marking gauge 
lo-inch, T bevel 
set of auger bits from 
I inch to I inch 
lo-inch sweep bit brace 
hand drill 
rose countersink 
spokeshave 
set of twist drill bits 
re to J inch by 64ths 
4-inch screw driver 
6-inch screw driver 
8-inch screw driver 
lo-inch screw driver 
3 assorted nail sets 
j-inch wood chisel 
|-inch wood chisel 



I ^-inch wood chisel 
I I -inch wood chisel 
I 6-inch extra-thin tapered 

triangular file 
I 6-inch slim tapered file 
I lo-inch rattail file 
I lo-inch flat mill file 
I lo-inch half-round 

bastard file 
I 12-inch half-round 

wood rasp 
I auger-bit file 
4 interchangeable file 

handles 
I 28-inch spirit level 
I glass cutter 
I putty knife 
I 18-inch wrecking bar 
I 8-inch adjustable wrench 
I 14-inch pipe wrench 
I 8-inch steel wing 

divider 
I scratch awl 
I cabinet scraper 
I 2-by-8-inch combination 

carborundum stone 
I 24-by- 1 6-inch steel square 
4 8-inch C clamps 
4 6-inch C clamps 
1 woodworker's bench vise 



Power Woodworking Tools make it easier for professional 
and amateur woodworkers to do decorative shaping of wood. 

Yuba Power Products. Inc. 




WOOF 

varied to suit the kind of lumber that is to be planed. 

The Planer does the same type of work as the jointer, 
but is a much heavier machine. It feeds the wood 
against a cutter mechanically, and it can be used only 
to plane lumber to a uniform thickness. 

The Wood-Turning Lathe was invented ages ago. It 
consists of a bed, a headstock, a tailstock, and a tool 
rest. On a lathe, the work revolves against tools oper- 
ated by hand. Many beautiful pieces of work can be 
produced on this wonderful machine tool. 

The lathe headstock is usually driven by motor. It 
carries the live center which causes the work mounted 
upon it to revolve. The other end of the work is sup- 
ported by and revolves upon the dead center in the tail 
stock. The shaping of the stock is done by the tools in 
the hands of the turner, who moves the tools back and 
forth upon the tool rest. 

The machine tools described so far are those most 
commonly used by the woodworker. There are many 
others such as the shaper, mortiser, router, drill press 
and Sander. But the beginner can easily learn more 
about these other machines after having studied the 
action and uses of the circular saw, the band saw, the 
jig saw, the jointer, the planer, and the lathe. 

All power machines used by the woodworker are very 
dangerous, and any one using them should carefully 
study the safety niles which usually are explained in the 
instruction books furnished by the manufacturer. 

Hand Woodworlcing Tools 

The hand tools used by the woodworker are quite 
generally known. The accompanying illustration shows 
some of them. The hobbyist who is just starting to equip 
his home workshop should look around the home. He 
will usually find there a number of tools that can be 
easily cleaned up, sharpened, and put into working 
condition again. With a hammer, a saw, a plane, a 
screwdriver, a chisel or two, and an ax, the early 
settlers of our country did some wonderful things. The 
homecrafter likewise can start with just such a collec- 
tion and then add more tools as the need for them arises 
during his projects. 

When buying tools for the home workshop, you should 
remember that there are usually three kinds from which 
to choose — the very cheap, the very expensive, and those 
that can be bought at a price somewhere between the 
cheap and the high-priced. Some of the cheaper tools 
may just be satisfactory. Most of them are not. The 
very high-priced tools are for the mechanic who must 
get years of use out of them. The medium-priced tools 
will be found satisfactory for the home workshop, and 
the beginner will do well to purchase this type until 
his work becomes more advanced and he can put high- 
priced tools to full use. See Tool. 

The table of hand tools with this article will give 
the homecrafter some idea of what tools he will need 
as he advances from the beginner stage to the point 
where he will be an object of envy to his friends. These 
tools are usually purchased as the need for them arises. 
If a person buys all his tools at once, he may buy tools 
he will never use. John j. Metz 

WOODY NIGHTSHADE. See Bittersweet. 

WOOF, or WEFT. See Wfavinc. 



335 




%. - 











A Flock of Wool-Producing Sheep heads for pasture on a 
ranch. These animals produce most of the wool used for cloth. 



A Sheep's Heavy Coat of Wool is sheared by an expert 
worker on one of the great ranches in the western United States. 



WOOL. People wear clothing made from wool to keep 
them warm in winter and cool in summer. Wool acts as 
a natural insulator and protects the body from outside 
changes in temperature. Wool is comfortable, too, be- 
cause it gives warmth without weight and absorbs 
moisture without feeling wet to the skin. 

Kinds of Wool. Nearly all die wool cloth we buy 
comes from the warm, fleecy hair that covers the bodies 
of domestic sheep. Special kinds are made from goats 
and members of the camel family. Aldiough ordinary 
hair and wool are very similar, true hair lacks tlie crimp, 
or curl, that gives wool its resilience. The outer surface 
of a hair has tiny, overlapping, rounded scales, rather 
closely attached. Wool fiber is covered with irregular, 
pointed scales, unattached for almost two thirds of their 
length. These scales hold the wool firmly together dur- 
ing spinning, and give it good felting properties. Felting 
means that the fibers interlock under heat, moisture, 
and pressure. 

Different kinds of sheep have varying qualities and 
amounts of wool. Merino sheep have the finest and larg- 
est amount of wool. A Merino ram will yield as much as 
q8 pounds of wool at a shearing. This is enough wool to 
make about eight men's suits, since the average man's 
suit uses up about 3j pounds of raw wool. A man's coat 
uses about 5 pounds of wool; a woman's coat, about 4. 

Of all the different kinds of wool used to make cloth- 
ing, sheep's wool ranks as the most important, because 
sheep are raised in nearly all parts of the world. Other 
wool-bearing animals are raised only in certain regions 
of the world. Among these animals are the camel from 
Africa and Asia; the alpaca of South America; the 



angora goat of Asia Minor, which gives us mohair; the 
cashmere goat of Tibet and northern India, whose 
fiber is made into soft, shiny cashmere woolens; the 
llama of South America, which produces a type of 
camel's hair; and the vicufia of the Andes in Peru, 
which gives us the rarest and softest wool, vicuna. 

Qualities and Grades of Sheep's Wool. Most of the 
wool we buy is sheared from the live animal. The shear- 
ing from a full-grown sheep is called a fleece. Lamb's 
wool comes from the first shearing of a young sheep, 
taken when the lamb is 8 to 1 2 months old. Wool from 
lambs 12 to 14 months old is called hogg, or hogget. It is 
very soft and fine and sells at a high price. Pulled wool is 
removed from the pelts of slaughtered sheep. Pulled 
wool is not so desirable as good fleece wool. 

Wool varies greatly with different breeds of sheep 
(see Sheep [Breeds of Domestic Sheep]). The health of 
the animals, the climate, the location of die farm or 
ranch, and the care given the animals affect the quality 
and length of wool. Neglect and poor feeding cause 
uneven, coarse wool. The fibers become weak in places 
and have litde elasticity. In healthy sheep, a protective 
film called jyoM' covers the wool. This oily substance con- 
tains the wool fat, or lanolin, as well as suint, the dried 
perspiration of the sheep. 

The most important points to consider in commercial 
judging of wool are die condition, the quality, the 
strength and length of fiber, and the color. By condition, 
wool buyers mean the amount of dirt and grease in the 
wool as it comes to market. Quality is the trade term for 
fineness, strength, and length of fiber. The wool from 
purebred Merinos has the highest quality of all sheep's- 



336 




Wool Is Fed Into Carding Machines after washing end sort- 
ing. Carding machines blend the fibers into a straight band. 



A Web of Carded Wool has passed through a set of carding 
rollers that press dust, seed, and other foreign matter from the wool. 



wool fibers. But Merino wool is sometimes shorter than 
desired. Longer fibers of high quality have been ob- 
tained by crossing Merinos with longer-wooled breeds. 
Pure white is the most desirable color for wool. 

For consumer uses, wool is classified according to the 
Wool Products Labeling Act of 1939, as wool, re- 
processed wool, and reused wool. The term wool means 
the fiber from the fleece of sheep or lambs, or the hair of 
the angora or cashmere goat. The term may also include 
die so-called speciallv fibers from the hair of the camel, 
alpaca, llama, and vicuna, provided die fiber has never 
been reclaimed from any woven or felted wool product. 
\'irgin, or new wool, describes a product of too per-cent 
wool that has never been reclaimed, reworked, re- 
processed, or reused from any spun, woven, knitted, 
felted, or used product. Reprocessed wool is wool that has 
been made into merchandise but was never used by the 
consumer. It may also be wool that has gone through 
a manufacturing process, but has again been reduced to 
a fibrous state and remade into some other wool product. 
Reused wool is wool that has been made up and used by 
the consumer and then reduced to a fibrous state and 
made up into merchandise. 

Commercial Classifications. For classifying wool as 
to fineness, or diameter of fiber, two systems are used; the 
blood, or American, system and the numerical, or English, 
system. 

The following table shows the grades of fineness un- 
der bodi systems. Most countries use the English system, 
which gauges the finest possible thread into which the 
wool can be spun. The fineness is measured in the 
number of fibers per inch. 



Finishing Wool Fabric gives the material its texture, drape, and 
luster. Steam-heated cylinders press out the unevenness. 

Wool Bureau 




337 



WOOL 

American System 

Fine 



Half-BIood 

Three-Eighths Blood 
Quarter Blood 

Low-Quarter Blood 

Common 

Braid 



English System 

80's 
70's 
64's 
60's 
38's 
56's 
50's 
48's 
46's 
44's 
40's 
36's 

The terms combing, French combing, and clothing indi- 
cate the length of the wool fiber. While there is no 
official standard for specific lengths, it is commonly 
accepted that combing wools are over 2 inches long. 
French combing fibers are about IJ to 2 inches long, 
and clothing wools are less than 1 j inches long. 

The two classes of wool yarns include worsteds and 
woolens. In worsted yarns, the fibers are made to lie 
parallel to each other and then are tightly spun into a 
firm, smooth yarn. In woolen yarns, the fibers lie in all 
directions, resulting in a soft, fuzzy yarn. Woolens and 
worsteds are two distinct types of woolen fabrics. When 
well made, each will give satisfactory service. 

Shearing and Manufacture. Ordinarily, sheep are 
sheared once a year, but in hot countries there may be 
two shearings. In the United States, the big shearing 
months are April and May. Hand clippers are still used 
on small farms. But on large ranches, power-driven 

LEADING WOOL PRODUCING STATES 

Pounds of wool clipped from sheep each year 
47,788,000 lbs. 
21,718,000 lbs. 
19,213,000 lbs. 

16,412,000 lbs. 

South Dakota B Bb Bi 

14,158,000 lbs. 

Colorado BBHHl 

13,887,000 lbs. 

11,862,000 lbs. 

10,664,000 lbs. 

10,632,000 lbs. 

New Mexico H^JI 
10,469,000 lbs. 



machinery does the work. As far as possible, the fleeces 
are removed in one piece. 

Processors sometimes wash the wool before shipment. 
But usually just the dirtiest and coarsest parts are 
sheared off in a process called skirting. Then the fleeces 
are rolled up, tied, packed in bales, and sent to the 
mill for sorting and scouring. 

Not only do fleeces from different sheep vary, but 
wool from the same sheep is not all of the same grade. 
The best comes from the shoulders and sides. The wool 
grows coarser and less desirable the farther back and 
the lower it follows the line of the body. The sorter 
starts at die edges of the fleece and works toward the 
center, placing the wool in different piles as he tears it 
out. He also picks out any pieces of refuse that can be 
easily removed. 

Scouring is necessary to cleanse the fleece thoroughly 
of dirt and grease. The wool passes through four or five 
vats containing warm water and soap. Mechanical rakes 
move the wool from one vat to another and control the 
amount of scouring and rinsing. Larger mills use 
chemicals to scour the wool. 

The wool can be dyed after careful drying, although it 
may be dyed even after the cloth is woven. It then goes 
through a blending process. Various qualities or colors 
are obtained by mixing different fibers. The wool is 
oiled to restore its natural pliancy, and is run through a 
series of carding machines. 

In the carding process, the wool passes through rows 
of teedi, which straighten and interblend the fibers into 
a flat band called a sliver. The preparation of worsted 
yarns is done on a drawing machine, which combs the 
sliver to make the fibers lie parallel to one another. 
This is called top making. The sliver, or top, is then 
made into soft, loose cord called roving, which is a little 
larger than crocheting yarn. After being wound on 
spools, the cord passes to the spinning room to be spun 
into yarn. The yarns are then woven together into 
cloth. The cloth becomes ready for tailoring after it has 
been washed and finished. 

Great Britain and the United .States lead in the manu- 
facture of wool products. The greatest wool-textile states 
in the United States are Massachusetts and Pennsyl- 
vania. Most of the sheep that produce our wool are 
raised in the southern and western states. The leading 
wool-producing states include Texas, Wyoming, Cali- 
fornia, Montana, South Dakota, Colorado, Utah, 
Idaho, Iowa, and New Mexico. This wool comes to the 
great markets of the East. Boston has the largest wool 
market in the United States. Charles p. macaluso 



Related Articles in World Book include: 
Materials of Wool 
Baize Duvetyn 

Broadcloth Felt 

Bunting Flannel 

Cashmere Gabardine 

Chenille Kersey 

Cheviot Linsey-Woolsey 

Covert Mohair 

Crepe 



Based on a 4-year average of government statistics. 



Alpaca 

Camel 

Cashmere Goat 

Clothing 

Dyes and Dyeing 



Unclassified 

Fiber 
Goat 
Lanolin 
Llama 



Poplin 

Serge 

Shoddy 

Tweed 

Velour 

Woolen 

Worsted 



Sheep 
Textile 
Vicuna 
Weaving 



338 




urt. Brace &amp; Co. 

Virginia Woolf 



WOOL WAX, or Fat. See Lanolin; Wax. 

WOOLEN is a fuzzy yarn spun from short lengths of 
carded wool. \\'eavers use it to make blankets and 
woolen cloths. They usually weave woolen cloths with 
a twill (a raised diagonal line). But the nap (fuzzy sur- 
face) hides the twill. Not all yarn made of woolen comes 
from sheep's wool. .See also Worsted. 

WOOLF, VIRGINIA (1882-1941), was a British novel- 
ist and essayist. Her delicate, carefuUv-colored fiction 
st)'le expressed a "life-is-flow" philosophy like that of 
the French philosopher, Henri Bergson (see Bergson, 
Henri). Her two most admired no\els are Mrs. Dalloway 
(1925) and To the Lighthouse (\921). In them, Mrs. Woo'lf 
delved into the states of consciousness of her characters. 
.She also wrote the novels Jacob's Room (1922). Orlando 
(1928), The Waves (1931), and The Tears (1937), and 
se\eral short-story collections. Her critical works include 
Mr. Bennett and Mrs. Broivn 
(1924) and The Common 
/?,W,7(1923). Mrs. Woolfs 
writing probably always 
will be appreciated by 
readers because of her su- 
perb use of language. 

She was born in London, 
the daughter of Sir Leslie 
Stephen, a biographer and 
critic. In 1912, she married 
Leonard Woolf. with whom 
she founded the Hogarth 
Press, a fiiTn which pub- 
lished works of important 
new writers. She and her 

husband were leading members of London's famous 
literar)' society, the "Bloomsburv" group." Mrs. \Voolf 
drowned herself in 1941, fearing the recurrence of a 

mental breakdown. Harry T. Moore 

WOOLLCOTT, ALEXANDER (1887-1943), an Amer- 
ican journalist and taleteller, became well-known for 
his unusual personality and his sharp tongue. George 
Kaufman and Moss Hart made Woollcott's oddities 
famous in the play The Man Jl'ho Came to Dinner (1939), 
in which WooUcott himself pla&gt;'ed the title role. 

Born in Phalan.x, N.J., Woollcott was graduated in 
1909 from Hamilton College. He became a newspaper- 
man in New York City, and 
made his first major suc- 
cess as a drama critic. He 
later became a regular con- 
tributor to The \ew Yorker 
magazine. From 1929 to 
1940, he made frequent 
radio broadcasts as '"The 
Town Crier." On these pro- 
grams, he commented on 
books and plays, and told 
many stories in a sentimen- 
tal but dramatic fashion. 
Woollcott's writings in- 
clude Shouts and Murmurs Alexander Woollcott 
(1923), Going to Pieces 

(1928), While Rome Burns (1934), The Woollcott Reader 
(1935), and H'oollcott'sSeeond Reader{l937). CarlNiemever 

WOOLLEY, MARY EMMA (1863-1947), was an out- 
standing American educator. She served as president of 




United Press Int. 



WOOSTER, COLLEGE OF 

Mount Holyoke College from 1900 to 1937 and was 
president of the American .Association of University 
Women from 1927 to 1933. Miss WooUey was also ac- 
tive in world peace movements and public affairs. In 
1 932, she became the first woman to represent the United 
States at an international disarmament conference. Presi- 
dent Herbert Hoover appointed her a delegate to the dis- 
armament conference at Geneva, Switzerland. Miss 
Woolley was born inNorwalk, Conn. In 1894,she became 
the first woman to receive a bachelor's degree from Brown 
Lmiversiiy. She received a master's degree from Brown 
in 1895. She wrote Internationalism and Disarmament. 

WOOLLY BEAR. See Cocoon. 

WOOLWORTH is the family name of two American 
businessmen who were brothers. 

Frank Winfield Woolworth (1852-1919) was the prin- 
cipal founder in 1912 of the F. W. \Voolworth Company, 
a chain of five-and-ten-cent stores. When he died, the 
chain had more than 1 ,000 stores with annual sales of 
more than 5100,000,000. In 1913, he built the Wool- 
worth Building in New York City. It was the tallest 
building in the world at that time. 

Woolworth was born in Rodman, N.Y., and he 
clerked in the village groceiy store there. In 1878, while 
working for the firm of Moore &amp; Smith in Watertown, 
N.Y., he suggested putting slow-moving merchandise 
on a counter and selling it for five cents. The venture 
was so successful that it was continued with new goods. 
Six store chains grew out of 
the five&lt;ent counter exper- 
iment. All were united in 
1912 to form the F. W. 
Woolworth Company. 

Charles S. Woolworth 
(1836-1947) was co-founder 
of the F. W. Woolworth 
Company. He served a.s 
vice-president until 1919 
and as chaimian of the 
board until 1944, when he 
re tued . He was born in Rod- 
man, N.Y. He clerked in 
a dr\'-goods store, and then 
managed a fuTn which sold 
shopworn merchandise. He founded 15 stores, which 
he united with 581 other stores in 1912 to form the 
F. W. Woolworth Company. w. H. Baughn 

WOOMERA. See Australia (In the 1950's). 

WOONSOCKET, R.I. (pop. 47,080; alt. 165 ft.), is an 
important textile center and the fifth largest city in 
Rhode Island. The name ]Voo&gt;uocket is of Indian origin 
and probably refers to the bend in the Blackstone River, 
which runs through the city (see Rhode Isl.\nd [inap]). 

Factories in Woonsocket make woolen and worsted 
yarns and fabrics, rubber goods, textile machinery, 
electronic equipment, and paper and plastic products. 

Woonsocket \vas first settled in 1667. It was an agri- 
cultural community until 1810, when one of the first 
cotton mills in the L'nited States was built here. It was 
incorporated as a town in 1867, and as a city in 1888. The 
city has a ma\'Qr-council government. Clarksqn .\. Collins hi 

WOOSTER, COLLEGE OF. See Universities and 
Colleges (table). 

339 




United Press Int. 

Frank Woolworth 



WORCESTER 

WORCESTER. See England (color map, The 39 His- 
toric Counties of England). 

WORCESTER, ]\THS tuhr. Mass. (pop. 186,587; met. 
area 328,898; alt. 475 ft.), is a leading New England 
manufacturing center. The city covers 37 square 
miles in east-central Massachusetts, almost midway 
between Boston and Springfield. Lake Quinsigamond 
borders Worcester on the cast. For location, see M.\SSA- 
CHUSETTS (color map). 

Cultural Life. Worcester is the home of the College 
of the 1 loly Cross, the oldest Roman Catholic college in 
New England. It was founded in 1843. Other schools 
include Assumption College, Clark University, and 
Worcester Polytechnic Institute. 

The Worcester Art Museum ranks as one of the finest 
smaller art centers in the world. The Worcester His- 
torical Society and the Science Museums of the Natu- 
ral History Society also attract many visitors. The 
American Antiquarian Society has a large collection 
of historical material which dates from 1620 to 1820. 

Industry. Worcester became an industrial center in 
the mid-1 8()0's, after the discovery of new methods for 
tiie manufacture of envelopes, grinding wheels, looms, 
and wire. Other products manufactured in Worcester 
include abrasives, aluminum forgings, crankshafts, elec- 
tric clocks, gauges, lathes, and paper cups. Worcester 
also makes precision finishing machines, revolvers, rivets 
and nuts, rugs, screws, and shoes. The Worcester metro- 
politan area also produces clay and glass products, 
and stone. 

History. The site of Worcester was a camping ground 
for the Nipmuck Indians until Daniel Gookin arrived 
in 1674. He settied the area and called it Quinsigamond 
Plantation. The setders left the region during King 
Philip's War (1675-1676). They returned after the war 
and named the settiement ]Vorcester, after Worcester, 
England. It was established as a town in 1684, but 
was abandoned again in 1702 during Queen Anne's 
War. Jonas Rice, one of the original settlers, returned 
in 1713. Several hundred other settlers followed Rice to 
Worcester. In 1722, the town became a seat of Worces- 
ter Clounty. Isaiah Thomas published the Massachusetts 
Spy in Worcester, encouraging a spirit of independence 
during Revolutionary days. In 1783, a Worcester court 
handed down a historic decision that the Massachusetts 
constitution did not permit slavery because it says "all 
men are born free and equal." In 1 786, Daniel Shays 
and his debt-burdened followers besieged the Worcester 
courthouse (see Shays' Rebellion). 

After the Blackstone Canal opened in 1828, the 
city grew as an industrial center. The canal connected 
Worcester with Narragansett Bay. 

Robert H. Goddard, the father of modern rocketry 
and space flight, was born in Worcester. He conducted 
the first scientific experiments with rockets in the United 
States in Worcester (see Goddard, Robert H.). 

Worcester received its city charter in 1848. It has a 
council-manager form of government. William j. Reid 

WORCESTER POLYTECHNIC INSTITUTE. See Uni- 
VERsniEs AND Colleges (table). 

WORDS. See B.asic English; Dictionary; Etymol- 
ogy; Langu.\ge; Pronunci.\tion; Semantics; Slang; 
Spelling; Vocabulary. 



WORDSWORTH, WILLIAM (1770-1850), was one of 
the great British poets of the Romantic era. He is best 
known for his nature poems and his sonnets. 

He was born on Apr. 7, 1 770, at Cockermouth, Cum- 
berland, England. After nine years at the Hawkshead 
grammar school, he entered St. John's College, Cam- 
bridge, from which he was graduated in 1791. At both 
schools he spent a great deal of time outdoors, develop- 
ing the love of nature which became the most important 
single influence in his life. He also began writing poems 
which at first were imitative and unoriginal. 

In 1790, Wordsworth visited France, Switzerland, 
Italy, and Germany. He went to France again in 1 791, 
in the midst of the French Revolution. The liberal ideas 
of the revolution stirred him, and he became an ardent 
republican. But the Reign of Terror in France shocked 
him. He gradually lost his revolutionary ideas. 

Lyrical Ballads. Wordsworth met Samuel Taylor 
Coleridge about 1 796, and the two became friends. 
They decided to collaborate in the writing of a volume 
of poetry. Lyrical Ballads, published in 1798, became 
one of the landmarks of English poetry. In it, Coleridge 
wrote of magical and super- 
natural subjects in a real- 
istic manner. Coleridge's 
poem, "Rime of the An- 
cient Mariner," first ap- 
peared in Lyrical Ballads. 
Wordsworth wrote about 

JW^^Ki ever)day objects and inci- 
•^ S^^H dents in an imaginative 

if' f^^^Kk. manner. In a famous pref- 
L ^^Kk ace to the 1800 edition, 

' ^^^^1 Wordsworth defined his 

^ ^^^^^k purpose in the poems. He 

Brown Bros. Said hc did not merely 
Williatn Wordsworth choose incidents and situa- 

tions from common life, but 
tried to relate or describe them "as far as was possible 
in a selection of language really used by men." His 
purpose had its pitfalls, and occasionally led Words- 
worth into failures. But his best poetry embodies the 
virtues of simplicity, sincerity, and realism, outlined in 
his famous preface. 

Wordsworth did not adhere strictly to his own theory. 
He wrote much of his best poetry, such as "Lines Com- 
posed a Few Miles above Tintern Abbey," "She Was a 
Phantom of Delight," "I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud," 
"Ode: Intimations of Immortality from Recollections 
of Early Childhood," and his sonnets, in a language 
more elevated than humble people used. 

Later Years. Wordsworth spent the winter of 1798 in 
Germany with his sister Dorothy and Coleridge. When 
he returned to England, he settled in the Lake District, 
where he lived until his death. He married Mary 
Hutchinson, a long-time friend, in 1802. 

The publication of The Excursion in 1814 brought to 
a close the most productive part of Wordsworth's career. 
Although critics were slow to appreciate his work, his 
reputation grew steadily. When Queen Victoria ap- 
pointed him poet laureate in 1843, the honor was 
recognized as deserved. He considered the long auto- 
biographical poem The Prelude (1850) his masterpiece, 
and worked on it most of his life. c. L. Cline 

See also Coleridge, Samuel Taylor; Lake Poets. 



340 



WORK, in physics, is the result that is produced when 
a force moves a body through a measurable distance. 
Thus, two factors are involved when work is done. One 
factor is the amount of force (F) applied, and the other is 
the distance (d) that the force moves the object. For 
example, a man does work when he lifts, pushes, or 
slides an object from one place to another. In physics, 
work is accomplished only when the force is sufficient 
to move die object. In other words, work is measured 
by what is done, and not by the effort that is applied to 
attempt to move an object. Therefore, a man does not 
do work if he applies force to an object without actually 
moving it. 

The amount of w-ork that is done is measured by 
multiplving dte force by the distance. This is stated in 
the formula \V=Fd, where 1)' stands for work, F stands 
for force, and d stands for distance. Force (F) is measured 
in pounds, tons, or any other measure of weight. Dis- 
tance {d) is measured in feet, inches, or some other 
linear measure. Work (It') is measured in foot-pounds, 
inch-pounds, or foot-tons, depending upon the linear 
measure diat is used to measure distance {d). For exam- 
ple, if one pound of apples is lifted one foot, the work 
done would be equal to one foot-pound. If an object 
weighing 50 pounds is lifted 4 incites, the work done 
would be 200 inch-poimds. If, however, a 4-pound 
object is lifted 50 inches, the work done is still 200 inch- 
pounds. 

Work differs from energy, in diat energy is the ability 
of a substance to do work. This energy may be potential 
or kinetic, depending upon whether the substance is 
stationary or in motion. The rate at which work is done 
is known as power. See Energy. 

Work is always done by some agent, such as man, 
horse, wind, electricity, or steam. The working agent 
produces the force (F) diat causes the motion. This 
motion is always produced against some form of resist- 
ance. For example, a horse pulling a wagon produces a 
form of motion that is done against the resistance of the 
friction of the road. 

.Scientists measure work in the centimeter-gram-sec- 
ond system, also known as the C.G.S. system. According 
to this system, force is measured in a tiny unit called a 
dyne. If a force of one dyne moves an object one centi- 
meter, the work is equal to one dyne-centimeter. This 
unit of one dyne-centimeter is called an erg. It is a small 
quantity of work and is therefore not suitable for all 
types of measurement. For most measurements, the 
unit known as the joule is used. One joule is equal to 

10,000,000 ergs. Robert L. Weber 

See also D^-ne; Foot-Pound; Joule; Thermody- 
namics. 

WORKER, insect. .See Ant (The Ant Colony); Bee 
(The Honeybee Colony); Termfte. 

WORKERS have many organizations listed in The 
\\'orld Book Enc^'clopedia under the key word in 
tlie name of the organization. For example: Steel- 
workers OF America, United. 

WORKING CONDITIONS. See Vocational Guid- 
ance (What Makes a Job). 

WORKING DOGS. See Dog (table. Recognized 
Breeds; color pictures); Seeing Eye; Sheep Dog; Sled. 

WORKING DRAWING is a plan that supplies infor- 
mation to make or assemble somediing. It may be an 
assembly drawing that shows how various parts of a ma- 



WORKS PROGRESS ADMINISTRATION 

chine are put togedier to make a workable finished 
product. Other drawings often accompany the assembly 
drawing to show how the various sections are assembled. 
A detailed drawing is a type of working drawing that 
guides production workers so that each part of a manu- 
factured item has the right size, shape, finish, and mate- 
rial. .See also Blueprint; Railroad, Model. 

WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION provides pay and 
medical help for injured workers, and pensions to their 
dependents in cases where death occurs. Loss of income 
due to accidents on the job has been a growing problem 
of workers since die introduction of machine methods 
to industry. Today, most major countries have laws or 
private programs for workmen's compensation. 

The first such laws w-ere passed in Germany in 1883. 
Austria followed the example of Germany in 1887, and 
Norway, Finland, France, Denmark, and Great Britain 
passed laws in the 1890's. Dunng the early 1900's, most 
other European countries enacted workmen's compen- 
sation laws. 

Employers' liability laws preceded workmen's com- 
pensation laws. They made an employer responsible for 
injuries to workmen caused by defective machinery or 
by negligence on die part of management. In 1880, 
Britain adopted one of the first such laws. 

In die United States, Maryland passed the first state 
compensation law in 1902. But die Supreme Court of 
the United States declared the Mar&gt;'land law and odier 
compensation acts of that decade unconstitutional. The 
cause of workmen's compensation was greatly aided 
when Congress passed the Federal Employees' Com- 
pensation Act of 1916. This law provided benefits for 
certain federal civilian workers, or dieir survivors, in 
connection with injuries or death on the job. Ten states 
passed workmen's compensation laws in 1911, Wiscon- 
sin being the first to put such an act into effect. In 1948, 
the last of the original 48 states enacted a workmen's 
compensation program. Alaska and Hawaii had such 
laws when they became states in 1959. 

The state workmen's compensation laws differ widely 
in provisions and administration. In general, die laws 
provide compensation and medical care for injured 
workers, and death benefits and pensions for the de- 
pendents of workers killed on the job. Employers bear 
the entire cost of workmen's compensation, except in a 
few states where workers contiibute small amounts. 
Most state laws provide training in new jobs for workers 
who cannot continue in their old work because of in- 
juries. The federal government and almost all die states 
have laws covering compensation for occupational dis- 
eases. Workmen's compensation laws exclude most farm 
workers and domestic servants, and some workers in 
small firms. 

In the early 1960's, the total premiums paid for work- 
men's compensation amounted to about $2,1 73,000,000 
a year, or about one per cent of the wages of covered 
workers. Total benefits were about $1,371,725,000. In 
an average week, about 44,400,000 workers were cov- 
ered under various plans. Robert j. mvers 
.See also Employees' Compens.\tion, Bure.\u of. 
WORKS PROGRESS ADMINISTRATION. See New- 
Deal (Relief); Roosen'elt, Franklin Delano (The 
New Deal); Adult Education. 



341 



WORLD 




WORLD. In all of the enormous universe, our world is only one of millions 
of heavenly bodies. In fact, the earth is one of the smallest bodies of the uni- 
verse. But we hardly ever think of the world as just a small planet. To us, the 
world is the most important part of the entire universe. The earth is the home 
of man, and the source of eveiything we use or make. 

From the very beginning of his life on earth, man has had to learn about 
the world in order to use it. For thousands of years, man knew only enough to 
get food and clothing. He lived in caves or in shelters made of branches. 
Man's knowledge constantly increased, sometimes slowly and sometimes 
rapidly. He learned how to live with others in large groups. He built cities 
and formed nations. He found ways to control many powerful natural forces. 
During the last few hundred years, man has made his most rapid progress. 
Today, we are making more efficient use of the wodd than any generation of 
the past. We are even reaching into space to learn more about the rest of the 
universe. 

This article tells about the world as we know it — the home of man today. 
The stoiy begins with a map of the world. This map shows how man has 
divided the land surface of the world into countries. The latest information 
on each country's size and population appears in tables following the world 
map. Many nations have joined groups called international organizations. 
The major international organizations are shown on special maps. 

Man can live almost everywhere on the land of the world. The geography 
section of this article explains why some places are more suitable than others 
for man's activities. The great family of mankind — more than 3,000,000,000 
persons — is described in separate sections of the article. These sections tell 
Nvhere the people of the world live, discuss mankind's racial groups, and note 
the languages that are spoken in various regions. . 

All human beings share certain needs. But many ways of life have developed 
in different parts of the world. The similarities and the differences among 
these cultures are described in a section on the life of the world. Other sections 
tell about man's arts and recreation, education, and science, and the economy 
of the world. 

Every generation of man faces many serious problems. Many people today 
believe that the major problems of the world can be solved chiefly by the 
strong efforts of nations working together. This idea is discussed in a special 
section called Challenge of the World. 




5 - -Tropic of Cani 



ropic of Cancer- 



/ / 



- 0° Equator 



LINE' 

TSLANOS" 



7V 



., TOKELAU 
ISLANDS ■ 
\ 

\ COOK 

'\\ .c.W Es'feRW ISLANDS 



TONGA 
ISLANDS 

- -Tropic of Capricorn- 



The contributors of this article are Phillip Bacon, Professor of Geography at Teachers 
College, Columbia University; Paul Bohannan, Professor of Anthropology ati Northwestern 
University; Stewart E. Fraser, Director of the Peabody International Center and Professor 
in International and Comparative Education at George Peabody College for Teachers; and 
Raymond F. Mikesell, W. E. Miner Professor of Economics at the University of Oregon. 




This part of the 
World is shown on 
these two pages. 




This port of the World 
is shown on the fol- 
lowing two pages. 



342 




- -^-- -;-r:5^ - 

z;* -^ -- DOMfNICAN REPUBLIC 

C* V ^' JAMAICA^^—"-^."-^^ PUERTO RICO 

-T^ BRITISH -i "'■ - - 4, viRGiri ISLANDS 



-y 



HONDURAS HAITI 

—^HONDURAS 



• GUADELOUPE 
', MARTINIOUF 



GUATEMALA f , , 



EL SALVADOR 



NICARAGUA 



COSTA RICAl 



QALAPASOS 



■RINIDAD AND TOBAGO 
UCUETIICI A X.BRITISH GUIANA 

VENEZUELA f! |. SURINAM 

^FRENCH-GUIANA 




South 



^ i BlR A Z I L 

V'-\^, SOUTH 




WORLD BOOK map 



FLAT-POLAR QUARTIC EQUAUAREA PROJECTION 
by permission The MERIDIAN Company 



GREENLAND 



ICELAND 



North 




^--Arctic Circle-- 



NETHERLANDS/'^ 



BELGIUM^f' O ^ 

Q' •—DENMARK 



■ Ca •—DENMARK \Wi'&lt;i»_'fl \jr . 

Atlantic j^^f^X s . , -- "gL,..- 

'-**J::t^te^^lT R OPE 

LUXEMBOURG -^^^^ ^^Lc3^SL0VAkV '^ ^ 



... RU-S-S I A 

(UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS) 



:-p ,'■ ■ I , • — HUN'SApY __-, 

. ■l'/5_'l AUSTRIA R0MAN1«"' /- . 

SWITZERLANa''' f r^'.^-' " 



CZECHteSLOVAKIA 

HUN'SAp 

iisVTA 



~^-^-^ I . ^ -? —— "fULJ 

PORTUGAL; SWITZERLANa''- f. ^v^-- 

f SPAIN/ ^,B^^,; ^&lt;- .TURKEY 

*^°''^S ,., ,J CYPRUS, ..• 

^ ', TUNISIA^, "*'■"'* LEBANON -fcA*, ■ 

CAtJARY d" i/ ISRAELi-;;C^-.IRAO 

ISLANDS o'' i-- -- -'1 ; -' " — '^ ' &gt; 

• -J ALGERIA ; ^^g^A 'u^TAny-. -"»*'■ Nr"-;, \ &gt; 



SPANISH r" 
SAHARA 




MONGOLIA 

CHINA 



.-^„„*\ ^JORDAN "^ 

EGYPf^ KUWAIT 



--5- - 



■ % '" ■; v PAKISTAN 

V B/VHHAIN \ \ 



MAURITANIA 



MALI 



SENEGA^Y^ 




NIGER 

A F 



'-■r 



^f. 



^«. 



Y 



COAST- 
MUSCAT 
/OMAN 



-GAMBIA j'tfpp 
■• , VOLTA 

GUJNEA . * • 

f\ &gt; 



PORTUGUESE 
GUINEA 




ic 



YEMEN 

X- 

• ADEN 

♦— FRENCH^SOMALILANO 



] /''SOUTHARABIA 




* BURMA 



LIBERIA) ^h -~ /* &lt;y / REPUBLIC V, 

TOGO '--'^&gt;. ^ 




WORLD MAP INDEX 



H6 Aden 

I 4 Afghanistan 

G4 Albania 

G5 Algeria 

G4 Andorra* 



r&gt;7 


Angola 


D9 


Argentina 


K8 


Australia 


R.1 


Austria 


h 4 


Azores Islands 


ns 


Bahama Islands 


Hh 


Bahrain 


Ffi 


Barbados 


(ia 


Basutoland 


(i« 


Bechuanalan{? 


(r1 


Belgium 


n4 


Bermuda 


J 5 


Bhutan 




Bolivia 

Bonin Islands 

Brazil 

British Guiana 

British Honduras 

Brunei 

Bulgaria 

Burma 

Burundi 

Cabinda 

Cambodia 

Cameroon 

Canada 

Canary Islands 

Cape Verde Islands' 

Caroline Islands 

Central African Republic 

Ceylon 

Chad 

Chile 

China 





JAPA 




North 

Pacific 



D6 

G7 

G7 

A7 

Dfi 

D5 

H4 

G3 

G6 

G3 

D5 

G3 

D7 

G5 

L 7 

Dfi 

H6 

E 10 

L8 

G2 

K5 

G3 

E 6 

B8 

Hfi 

G7 

C6 

F6 

F6 

L6 

F3 

G4 

E I 

D5 

K6 



Colombia 

Congo ( Brazzavile) 

Congo ( L^opoldville) 

Cook Islands 

Costa Rica 

Cuba 

Cyprus 

Czechoslovakia 

Dahomey 

Denmark 

Dominican Republic 

East Germany 

Ecuador 

Egypt lU.A.R.) 

Ellice Islands 

El Salvador 

Ethiopia 

Falkland Islands 

Fiji Islands 

Finland 

Formosa (Taiwan) 

France 

French Guiana 

French Polynesia 

French Somaliland 

Gabon 

Galapagos Islands 

Gambia 

Ghana 

Gilbert Islands 

Great Britain 

Greece 

Greenland 

Guadeloupe 

Guam 



BONIN ISLANDS OCCQtl 



FORMOSA 
MACAO 



MARIANA^ 
ISLANDS ' 




-Tropic of Cancer-X — 
WAKE ISLAND \^ 



MARSHALL ISLANDS 



6 



GILBERT I ; 
■ISLANDS 1 j 

— Equator 0°4&lt;1 



SOLOMON 
ISLANDS 



T^ 



NEW HEBRIDE^-. 

ISLANDS 1 FIJI 



MEW 
CALEDONIAlk , 



m J - AUSTRALIA v r lt%r 

f^^^:..J -/ Tropic of Cap: 

AUSTRALIA 





30° -r--' 



This part of the World is 
shown on these two pages. 



This port of the World 
is shown on the pre- 
ceding two pages. 



C6 

F6 

D5 

05 

J 5 

G3 

F2 

I 5 

J 7 

H4 

H4 

F3 

H4 

G4 

F6 

05 

K4 

H4 

H6 

H 10 

H5 

J 5 

H4 

F6 

G5 

G3 

A6 

G3 

J 5 

H8 

H7 

J 6 

I 6 

F5 

G4 

l&lt;5 

L5 

05 

F5 

C5 

A5 

G4 

J 3 

F4 

H8 

H5 

L7 

I 5 

G3 

L8 

K7 

LB 

L9 

0I&gt; 

G5 

G6 

K4 

J 5 

G2 

I 5 

06 

1(7 

E8 

07 

K6 

B8 

G3 

F4 

F6 

K7 

05 

H5 

H8 

G8 

G6 

G3 

I 2 

H7 

G4 

H5 

F6 

H7 

F6 

I 5 

L7 

H6 

G9 

H5 

K4 

J 6 

G8 

F4 

F5 

G5 

ES 

G I 

H8 

G2 

G3 

H4 

H7 

J 6 

G6 

A7 

A8 

E6 

H5 

G4 

H4 

H6 

C4 

Ffi 

E9 

G4 

06 

05 

L5 

G3 

A7 

H5 

G4 

G7 



Guatemala 

Guinea 

Haiti 

Honduras 

Hong Kong 

Hungary 

Iceland 

India 

Indonesia 

Iran 

Iraq 

Ireland 

Israel 

Italy 

Ivory Coast 

Jamaica 

Japan 

Jordan 

Kenya 

Kerguelen Islands 

Kuwait 

Laos 

Lebanon 

Liberia 

Libya 

Liechtenstein*" 

Line Islands 

Luxembourg 

Macao 

Madagascar 

Malawi 

Malaysia 

Maldjve Islands 

Mali 

Malta 

Mariana Islands 

Marshall Islands 

Martinique 

Mauritania 

Mexico 

Midway Island 

Monaco* 

Mongolia 

Morocco 

Mozambique 

Muscat-Oman 

Nauru 

Nepal 

Netherlands 

New Caledonia 

New Guinea 

New Hebrides Islands 

New Zealand 

Nicaragua 

Niger 

Nigeria 

North Korea 

North Vietnam 

Norway 

Pal&lt;istan 

Panama 

Papua 

Paraguay 

Peru 

Philippines 

Pitcairn 

Poland 

Portugal 

Portuguese Guinea 

Portuguese Timor 

Puerto Rico 

Qatar 

Reunion 

Rhodesia 

Rio Muni 

Romania 

Rus;:a (U.S.S.R.) 

Rwanda 

San Marino* 

Saudi Arabia 

Senegal 

Seychelles 

Sierra Leone 

Sikkim 

Solomon Islands 

Somalia 

South Africa 

South Arabia 

South Korea 

South Vietnam 

South West Africa 

Spain 

Spanish Sahara 

Sudan 

Surinam 

Svalbard 

Swaziland 

Sweden 

Switzerland 

Syria 

Tanzania 

Thailand 

Togo 

Tokelau Islands 

Tonga Islands 

Trinidad and Tobago 

Trucial Coast 

Tunisia 

Turkey 

Uganda 

United States 

Upper Volta 

Uruguay 

Vatican City* 

Venezuela 

Virgin Islands 

Wake Island 

West Germany 

Western Samoa 

Yemen 

Yugoslavia 

Zambia 



*Does not appear on map: key shows general location. 



WORLD/ , . r , ,„ , , 

/Nations or the World 

In 1966, there were 136 independent countries in the 
world, and more than 75 colonies or territories (also 
called dependencies). An independent country has its own 
government. A colony or territoiy is governed by 
another nation. 

The independent countries cover almost all the land 
area of the world. Their people account for more than 
3,000,000,000 persons — most of the world's population. 
Only about 50,000,000 persons live in the dependencies. 

The largest countiy in the world is Russia. It has an 
area of 8,649,500 square miles. Seven other countries 
each have an area of over 1 ,000,000 square miles. These 



countries, in order of size, are Canada, China, the 
United .States, Brazil, Australia, India, and Argentina. 
The smallest independent country is Vatican City, 
which occupies fewer than 109 acres. Seven other small 
countries cover fewer than 250 square miles each. They 
are Andorra, Bahrain, Liechtenstein, the Maldive Is- 
lands, Malta, Monaco, and San Marino. 

Throughout history, the political map of the world 
has changed almost constantly. Most of the important 
changes have resulted from great wars. During ancient 
times, the powerful armies of such conquerors as Julius 
Caesar and Alexander the Great took over country after 
country. The concjuerors built these coiuitries into vast 
empires. In time, the ancient empires became weak and 
broke up into many countries again. Other empires rose 



INDEPENDENT COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD 



Name 

Afghanistan 

Albania 

Algeria 

Andorra 

Argentina 

Australia 

Austria 

Bahrain 

Belgium 

Bhutan 

Bolivia 

Brazil 

Bulgaria 

Burma 

Burundi 

Cambodia 

Cameroon 

Canada 

Central .\frican 

Republic 
Cevlon 
Chad 
Chile 
China 
Colombia 
Congo 
Congo 
Costa Rica 
Cuba 
Cyprus 

Czechoslovakia 
Dahomey 
Denmark 

Dominican Republic 
Ecuador 
Egypt (U.A.R.) 
El Salvador 
Ethiopia 
Finland 
Formosa 
France 
Gabon 
Gambia 

Germany (East) 
Germany (West) 
Ghana 
Great Britain 
Greece 
Guatemala 
Guinea 
Haiti 
Honduras 
Hungary 
Iceland 
India 
Indonesia 
Iran 
Iraq 
Ireland 
Israel 
Italy 

Ivory Coast 
Jamaica 
Japan 
Jordan 
Kenya 

Korea (North) 
Korea (South) 
Kuwait 



Area 
(sq. mi.) 

2S3,861 

11,101) 

919,593 

175 

1,072,070 

2,971,081 

32,374 

231 

11,779 

18.147 

424,163 

3,286,478 

42,729 

261,789 

10,747 

69,898 

183,569 

3,851,809 

238,224 

25,332 

495,754 

286,397 

3,691,502 

439,513 

132,047 

905,565 

19,575 

44,218 

3,572 

49,370 

44,696 

16,619 

18,816 

104,506 

386,101 

8,260 

457,267 

130,120 

13,885 

211,207 

103,089 

4,003 

41,815 

96,114 

91,843 

94,214 

50,944 

42,042 

94,926 

10,714 

43,277 

35,919 

39,768 

1,262,274 

894,644 

636,294 

173,260 

27,135 

7,992 

116,303 

124,503 

4,232 

142,726 

37,301 

224,960 

46,540 

38,004 

6,000 



Population 

16,070,000 
1,919,000 

12,790,000 
9,000 

23,035,000 

11,450,000 
7,166,000 
151,000 
9,382,000 
748,000 
4,188,000 

82,696,000 
8,260,000 

25,016,000 
2,890,000 
6,484,000 
4,346,000 

20,004,000 

1,287,000 

11,678,000 

2,899,000 

8,738,000 

700,000,000 

18,059,000 
861,000 

15,428,000 

1,453,000 

7,598,000 

595,000 

14,180,000 
2,122,000 
4,746,000 
3,657,000 
5,094,000 

30,270,000 
2,908,000 

23,950,000 
4,650,000 

12,233,000 

47,920,000 
457,000 
340,000 

17,266,000 

57,845,000 
7,933,000 

54,108,000 
8,650,000 
4,412,000 
3,470,000 
4,706,000 
2,223,000 

10,177,000 

192,000 

489,254,000 

106,777,000 

22,857,000 
8,350,000 
2,832,000 
2,386,000 

51,369,000 
3,592,000 
1,732,000 

97,913,000 
2,035,000 
9,310,000 

1 1,289,000 

29.095,000 
231,000 



Capitol 

Kabul 

Tirane 

Algiers 

Andorra 

Buenos Aires 

Canberra 

Vienna 

Manama 

Brussels 

Thimbu 

La Paz 

Brasilia 

Sofia 

Rangoon 

Bujumbura 

Phnom Penh 

Yaounde 

Ottawa 

Bangui 

Colombo 

Fort-Lamy 

Santiago 

Peking 

Bogota 

Brazzaville 

Leopold ville 

San Jos(? 

Havana 

Nicosia 

Prague 

Porto Novo 

Copenhagen 

,Santo Domingo 

Quito 

Cairo 

San Salvador 

Addis Ababa 

Helsinki 

Taipei 

Paris 

Libreville 

Bathurst 

East Berlin 

Bonn 

Accra 

London 

Athens 

Guatemala 

Conakry 

Port-au-Prince 

Tegucigalpa 

Budapest 

Reykjavik 

New Delhi 

Djakarta 

Tehran 

Baghdad 

Dublin 

Jerusalem 

Rome 

Abidjan 

Kingston 

Tokyo 

Amman 

Nairobi 

Pyongyang 

Seoul 

Kuwait 



C3 \jr inc n 
Name 


Area 
(sq. mi.) 

91,429 


Populolion 


Capitol 


Laos 


2,024.000 


X'icntiane 


Lebanon 


4,015 


2,080,000 


Beirut 


Liberia 


43,000 


1,046,000 


'Monrovia 


Libya 


679,360 


1,340,000 


Tripoli 


Liechtenstein 


61 


16,000 


Vaduz 


Luxembourg 


998 


326,000 


Luxembourg 


Madagascar 


230,035 


5,821,000 


Tananarive 


Malawi 


46,066 


4,060,000 


Zomba 


Malavsia 


128,654 


11,551,000 


Kuala Lumpur 


Maldive Is. 


115 


93,000 


Male 


Mali 


464,874 


4,553,000 


Bamako 


Malta 


122 


338,000 


\'alletta 


Mauritania 


419,230 


718,000 


Nouakchott 


Mexico 


761,602 


42,244,000 


Mexico City 


Monaco 


0.8 


24,000 


Monaco 


Mongolia 


592,665 


1,091,000 


Ulan Bator 


Morocco 


171.305 


13,840,000 


Rabat 


Muscat-Oman 


82,000 


597,000 


Muscat 


Nepal 


54,362 


10,210,000 


Katmandu 


Netherlands 


12,978 


12,220,000 


Amsterdam 


New Zealand 


103,736 


2.587,000 


Wellington 


Nicaragua 


57,143 


1,597,000 


Managua 


Niger 


489,190 


3.154,000 


Niamey 


Nigeria 


356,669 


58,950,000 


Lagos 


Norway 


125,181 


3,751,000 


Oslo 


Pakistan 


365,529 


107,009,000 


Rawalpindi 


Panama 


29,209 


1,270,000 


Panama 


Paraguay 


157,047 


1,980,000 


Asuncion 


Pei;u 


496,223 


11,777,000 


Lima 


Philippines 


115,707 


32,926,000 


Quezon City 


Poland 


120,359 


31,711,000 


VVarsaw 


Portugal 


35,510 


9,140,000 


Lisbon 


Qatar 


8,500 


42,000 


Doha 


Rhodesia 


150,333 


4,350,000 


Salisbury 


Roinania 


91,699 


19,422,000 


Bucharest 


Russia 


8,649,500 


232,500,000 


Moscow 


Rwanda 


10,159 


2,868,000 


Kigali 


Samoa, Western 


1,097 


129,000 


,\pia 


San Marino 


24 


17,000 


San Marino 


Saudi Arabia 


870,001 


6,820,000 


Riyadh 


Senegal 


76,124 


3,358,000 


Dakar 


Sierra Leone 


27,925 


2,739,000 


Freetown 


Sikkim 


2,744 


177,000 


Gangtok 


Somalia 


246,202 


2,211,000 


Mogadiscio 


South Africa 


472,359 


18,220,000 


Cape Town; Pretoria 


Spain 


194,884 


31,839,000 


Madrid 


Sudan 


967,501 


13,370,000 


Khartoum 


Sweden 


173,665 


7,772,000 


.Stockholm 


Switzerland 


15,941 


5,776,000 


Bern 


Syria 


71,228 


5,595,000 


Damascus 


Tanzania 


352,820 


10,603,000 


Dar es Salaam 


Thailand 


198,456 


31,647,000 


Bangkok 


Togo 


21,853 


1,598,000 


Lome 


Trinidad and 


1,980 


990,000 


Port-of- 


Tobago 






Spain 


Trucial Coast 


32,278 


111,000 




Tunisia 


48,332 


4,553,000 


Tunis 


Turke&gt;' 


301,381 


32,264,000 


.■\nkara 


L'ganda 


92,525 


7,423,000 


Kampala 


United Stales 


3,675,633 


196,759,000 


Washington. D.C. 


Upper V'olta 


105,869 


4,726,000 


Ouagadougou 


Uruguay 


72,172 


2,653,000 


Montevideo 


Vatican City 


0.2 


1,000 




Venezuela 


352,143 


8,920,000 


Caracas 


Vietnam (North) 


51,294 


18,797,000 


Hanoi 


Vietnam (South) 


65,948 


16,012,000 


Saigon 


Yemen 


75,290 


4,978,000 


.Sana 


^'ugoslavia 


98,766 


19,615,000 


Belgrade 


Zambia 


288,130 


3,730,000 


Lusaka 



Population fieiiies arc 19G0 t-siiiiiatt-s based on tht- most rect-nt official stallsUfs. All nations and capitals in this table have separate WORLD BOOK arikles 



and fell dining lalei' periods of history, and the map 
changed again and again. 

During the 1900's, Wodd Wars I and II caused many 
important changes on the map. As a result of World 
War I, several new nations were formed in Europe. 
They included Austria, Czechoslovakia, Hungaiy, and 
Yugoslavia. After World War II, several European na- 
tions changed in size, and meuiy new nations were 
established in Asia. But the greatest change took place 
in Africa among the colonies of various European na- 
tions. A strong movement for independence swept the 
continent from colony to colony. More than 30 new 
African nations were established during the late 1950's 
and the early 1960's. 

The countries of the world may be grouped in several 



ways. People often call the countries of the Eastern 
Hemisphere the Old World, and those of the Western 
Hemisphere, the \ew World. Countries also may be 
grouped by regions, such as the Far East, the Middle 
East, or Latin America. Sometimes countries are grouped 
according to continent, such as African, Asian, or Euro- 
pean. After World War II, Russia and other communist 
countries became known as the Communist ]\'orld. The 
United States and its allies in the struggle against the 
spread of communism became known as the Free World. 
Many nations have not taken sides in the struggle. They 
include India, Indonesia, Pakistan, and most of the new 
nations of Africa. Such countries are often grouped to- 
gether as the unaligned or uncommitted nations, and 
sometimes are called a Third Force. 



CONTINENTS OF THE WORLD 



Name 

Africa 
Antarctica 
Asia 
Australia 



Area (sq. mi.) 

11,673.000 
5,100,000 

17,153,000 
2,971,081 



Population 

3 11, .300,000 



1,887,500,000 

11,450,000 



Name 

Europe 

North .\merica 

South .Xmerica 



Area (sq. mi.) 

4.0()3,0U0 
9,303,000 
0,870,000 



Population 

021,000,000 
295,600,000 
168,200,000 



COLONIES AND TERRITORIES OF COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD 



Name 


Area 
(sq. mi.) 


ljr&lt;iiC3 Ml 
Population 


■"•1/ ICRHI 

Copital 


Aden (G.B.) 


75 


244,000 


Aden 


Andaman, Nicobar 








(India) 


3.215 


63,548 


Port Blair 


.\ngoIa (Port.) 


481,352 


4,939,000 


Luanda 


.\zores Is. 


893 


327,480 


Ponta 


(Port.) 






Delgada 


Bahama Is. (G.B.) 


4,400 


122,000 


Nassau 


Basutoland (G.B.) 


11,716 


746,000 


Maseru 


Bechuanaland (G.B.) 


222,000 


352,000 


Gaberoncs 


Bermuda (G.B.) 


21 


46,000 


Hamilton 


Bonin Is. (U.S.) 


40 


220 




British Guiana 


83,000 


664,000 


George- 
town 


British Honduras 


8,867 


107,000 


Belize 


Brunei (G.B.) 


2,220 


102,000 


Brunei 


Canton, Enderbury 








(G.B., U.S.) 


27 


300 




Cape \'erde (Port.) 


1,557 


234,000 


Praia 


Channel Is. (G.B.) 


75 


112,000 




Comoro Is. (Fr.) 


838 


200.000 


Dzaoudzi 


Cook Is. (N.Z.) 


93 


21,000 


Avarua 


Faeroe Is. (Den.) 


540 


37.000 


Thorshavn 


Falkland Is. 


4,700 


2,000 


Port 


(G.B.) 






Stanley 


Fernando Pdo 


785 


71.000 


Santa 


(Spain) 






Isabel 


Fiji Is. (G.B.) 


7,040 


471,000 


Suva 


French Guiana 


35,135 


39,000 


Cayenne 


French Polynesia 


1,550 


91.000 


Papeete 


Gibraltar (G.B.) 


2 


20.000 


Gibraltar 


Gilbert, Ellice (G.B.) 


369 


55,000 


Tarawa 


Greenland (Den.) 


840,001 


37,000 


Godthaab 


Guadeloupe (Fr.) 


087 


310.000 


Basse Terre 


Guam (U.S.) 


212 


08.000 


Agana 


Hong Kong (G.B.) 


398 


3,810,000 


Victoria 


Johnston I. (U.S.) 


0.5 


156 




Line Is. (G.B., U.S.) 


240 


1,225 




Macao (Port.) 


6 


175,000 


Macao 


Madeira Is. (Port.) 


308 


268.937 


Funchal 


Man, Isle of (G.B.) 


227 


48.000 


Douglas 


Martinique (Fr.) 


425 


319,000 


Fort-de- 
France 


Mauritius (G.B.) 


809 


748,000 


Port Louis 


Midway I. (U.S.) 


2 


2,356 




Mozambique 


302,329 


7,058.000 


Louren^o 


(Port.) 






Marques 


Nauru (Austral.) 


8 


5,000 




Neth. Antilles 


371 


209,000 


Willemstad 


New Caledonia (Fr.) 


7,330 


84,000 


Noumea 



Name 


Area 
(iq. mi.) 


Population 


Capital 


New Guinea 


93,000 


1,522,000 


Port 


(Australia) 






Moresby 


New Hebrides Is. 








(G.B. and Fr.) 


5,700 


65,000 


Vila 


Niue I. (N.Z.) 


100 


5,000 


Alofi 


Norfolk (Austral.) 


13 


853 


Kingston 


Pacific Islands, Trust 








Territory of the (U.S.) 701 


88,215 


Saipan 


Caroline Is. 


447 


59,735 




Mariana Is. 


184 


10.275 




Marshall Is. 


70 


18.205 




Panama Canal 








Zone (U.S.) 


553 


47,000 


Balboa 


Papua (Australia) 


90,540 


555,000 


Port 

Moresby 


Pitcairn I. (G.B.) 


2 


130 


Adams- 
town 


Portuguese Guinea 


13,948 


563,000 


Bissau 


Puerto Rico (U.S.) 


3,435 


2.677,000 


San Juan 


Reunion (Fr.) 


969 


389,000 


St. Denis 


Rio Muni (Spain) 


10,045 


199,000 


Bata 


Ryukyu Is. (Japan 








and U.S.) 


1,777 


1,168.448 


Naha 


Saint Helena (G.B.) 


102 


5,700 


Jamestown 


Saint Pierre and 








Miquelon (Fr.) 


93 


5,000 


St. Pierre 


Samoa (.\mer.) 


76 


24,000 


Pago Pago 


Sao Tome and 








Principe (Port.) 


372 


63,485 


Sao Tome 


Seychelles (G.B.) 


156 


47,000 


Victoria 


Solomon Is. (G.B.) 


11,500 


133,000 


Honiara 


Somaliland. French 


8,494 


86.000 


Djibouti 


South Arabia (G.B.) 


111.000 


1,110.000 




South West Africa 








(S.Af.) 


318,261 


609,000 


Windhoek 


Surinam (Neth.) 


55,144 


361.000 


Para- 
maribo 


Svalbard 


23,957 





Longyear- 


(Norway) 






byen 


Swaziland (G.B.) 


6,704 


305.000 


Mbabane 


Timor (Port.) 


5,763 


571,000 


Dili 


(Indonesia) 


7,533 


572.288 




Tokelau Is. (N.Z.) 


4 


2,000 




Tonga Is. (G.B.) 


269 


76,000 


Nukualofa 


Virgin Is. (G.B.) 


59 


8,000 


Road Town 


Virgin Is. (U.S.) 


132 


36,000 


Charlotte 
Amalie 


Wake I. (U.S.) 


3 


1,097 




Wallis, Futuna (Fr.) 


106 


9,900 





The colonies and territories listed are administered by the country shown in parentheses. Each has a separate article In WORLD BOOK. 



344C 



^p^^ International Organizations 



Many countries are members of inferna- 
tional organizations. Most of these organi- 
zations are formed by countries that share 
similar interests in a certain region. Their 
representatives meet to discuss problems, 
to settle disputes among the member na- 
tions, or to plan joint military action for their 
defense in case of attack. 



UNITED NATIONS 
(UN) 

The United Nations is the largest and most 
important international organization. It works for 
the peace and security of all countries. The UN 
has more than 1 10 members. 



NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION 

(NATO) 

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is 

a defense alliance of 1 3 European nations and the 
United States and Canada. NATO also works for 
economic cooperation among its members. 



WARSAW PACT 

The Warsaw Pact unites Russia and certain com- 
munist nations of Eastern Europe under a single mili- 
tary command. The poet was signed in Warsaw in 
1 955. Warsaw Pact headquarters are in Moscow. 



ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY 
(OAU) 

The Organization of African Unity is an as- 
sociation of over 30 independent African countries. 
It was organized in 1 963, chiefly to promote the 
economic and cultural progress of its members. 



ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES 
(OAS) 

The Organization of American States is 

made up of 20 Latin-American countries and the 
United States. The OAS, formed in 1 948, works for 
collective defense, and settlement of disputes. 



SOUTHEAST ASIA TREATY ORGANIZATION 
(SEATO) 

The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization 

provides for the defense of Southeast Asia and the 
Southwest Pacific against militory aggression. The 
eight SEATO members signed the treaty in 1954. 



CENTRAL TREATY ORGANIZATION 
(CENTO) 

The Central Treaty Organization is an alli- 
ance of Great Britain, Iran, Pakistan, and Turkey, 
chiefly for defense. The United States takes part 
in CENTO meetings, but is not a full member. 





344d 





WORLD BOOK maps 



344e 



(J XJ^J World Cultural Regions 



Anglo-America is the cultural region made up of the Eng- 
lish-speaking countries of the Western Hemisphere — the 
United States and Canada. They share laws and customs that 
came from England, or Anglia, the Latin name for England, 



Latin America includes Mexico and the countries south of it 
to the southern tip of South America. Latin-American ways of 
life came largely from Spain, Portugal, or France, and are 
bosed on those of ancient Rome, once called Latium. 



Eastern Europe consists almost entirely of Russia and its 
communist allies — Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East 
Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and Yugoslavia. 
These countries cover almost two-thirds of Europe. 




Western Europe is made up of 25 countries that ore sep- 
arated from Eastern Europe by the communist iron curtain. 
The nations of Western Europe have formed several organi- 
zations for military defense and economic cooperation. 



The Middle East ties where Africa, Asia, and Europe meet. 
Since Biblical times, this region has served as an important 
link between the three continents. Most of the people are 
Moslems. Arabic is the chief Middle East language. 




The Far East is the easternmost region of Asia. It is also 
called East Asio or the Orient. China and Japan ore the 
chief nations of the Far East. Most of the region's people 
speak Chinese or a language related to it. 



WORLD. 



Geography 
of the World 




WORLD BOOK maps 



The surface of the earth consists of land and water. 
Water covers about 70 per cent of the world. Land 
makes up about 30 per cent of the earth's surface. 

The water that covers most of the earth's surface 
is sometimes called the world ocean. It is a continuous 
body of water, made up of three great oceans — the 
Pacific, the Atlantic, and the Indian. The Pacific is 
the largest ocean. The Pacific is about twice as large 
as the Atlantic. The Indian is almost as large as the 
Atlantic. The waters of the three great oceans come 
together around Antarctica. The Atlantic and Pacific 
waters meet again in the world's northernmost region. 
There, they form the Arctic Ocean. See Ocean. 

The land rises from the world ocean and forms seven 
continents and many islands. Asia is the largest conti- 
nent. The others, in order of size, are Africa, North 
America, South America, Antarctica, Europe, and 
Australia. Geographers often consider Europe and Asia 
one continent and call it Eurasia. The largest island is 
Greenland, northeast of North America in the Atlantic 
Ocean. More than 30,000 islands lie scattered through- 
out the Pacific Ocean. Most of them are in the south- 
western Pacific. Those islands are grouped under the 
name Oceania. 

Except for Antarctica, the continents have many 
lakes and rivers. The largest inland body of water is a 
huge lake of salt water called the Caspian Sea. It lies be- 
tween Asia and Europe, east of the Caucasus Moun- 
tains. Lake Superior, one of the Great Lakes of North 
America, is the largest body of fresh water in the world. 
The longest river is the Nile River of Africa, which flows 
4,160 miles. Almost as long as the Nile are the Amazon 
River of South America and the Mississippi-Missouri 
river system of the United States. 

The deepest known spot of the oceans is Challenger 
Deep — 36,198 feet below the surface of the Pacific. 
Challenger Deep is southwest of the island of Guam. 
The highest point on earth is the peak of Mount Everest 
— 29,028 feet above sea level. Mount Everest rises in 
the Himalaya mountain system, on the border between 
Nepal and Tibet. 

Man can live almost everywhere on land. Biu some 
places are poorly suited for human activities. Most of 
Antarctica lies buried beneath ice and snow. Scientists 
have, however, established a few bases there. The princi- 
pal places where people make their homes are (1) 
mountains, (2) plateaus, (3) hilly regions, and (4) plains. 
Most persons live on the plains or in hilly places. Most 
of those regions have plenty of water and rich soil. The 
plains and hills are generally good places for people to 
develop fanning, manufacturing, and trade. Relatively 
few persons live in the high mountains or on plateaus. 
Some mountain valleys and high grassy plateaus are 
good places for raising cattle or sheep. But most of the 
snow-capped mountains and high plateaus are too cold, 
dry, or rough for comfortable living. 



344f 








^^ The Home of Man 



Man can live almost everywhere on land. But only 
about 30 per cent of the earth's surface is made up 
of land, and some of the land is not suitable for hu- 
man activities. Most of the world's people live on the 
plains or in hilly regions. These regions ore usually 
good places for farming, manufacturing, or trade. 



WATER 

70% 

of world's 

surface. 



United Press Int. 

The Ocean covers more than 70 per cent 
of the earth's surface. The ocean has al- 
ways been a major source of food. Now it 
is also becoming a source of power, min- 
erals, and drinking water. 

Fritz HenU-. M..nkmc: 




k - 




■^^ 



Farms and Towns usually 
develop wherever man finds 
plenty of fertile soil and water. 



Desert Areas con often be 
turned into useful lands. Much 
of Israel's dry Negev area has 
been changed into rich farm- 
land by irrigation systems. 



The Polar Regions are 

thickly covered by ice and 
snow during most of the year. 
The hardy Eskimos have devel- 
oped a way of life that suits 
them to the Arctic northland. 




WORLD 



People of the World 




If all the people in the world lined 
up — 10 in a row — near the equo- 
tor, they would circle the earth 
more than five times. 



2000 B.C. 

1 10,000,000 



(fr[!V) The Population of the World 



The population of the world in 1966 was more than 3,301,600,000. and it 
continues to rise rapidly. The yearly increase during the mid-1960"s was about 
69.000,000 persons, or about 2 per cent. At that rate, the population of the 
world will almost double from the mid-1 960's to the year 2000. 

If all the people of the world were distributed evenly, there would be almost 
60 persons for eveiy square mile of land. But, of course, people are not distrib- 
tUed evenly. The population density (the average number of persons living on 
each square mile) ranges from none to thousands. No one lives in most of 
Antarctica or in parts of some deserts. Thousands of persons live on eveiy 
square mile in parts of China, Egypt, India, Indonesia, and other heavily 
populated countries. Large cities have the highest population densities. 
Chicago, for example, averages about 15,000 persons to the .square mile. 

The most densely populated areas of the world are in Europe, and in eastern 
and southern Asia. North America has clusters of dense populations in some 
northeastern and midwestern areas, and along the Pacific coast. Africa, 
Australia, and .South America have areas of dense populations near the coasts. 
The interiors of these three continents are only thinly settled. 

The important changes and shifts of the world population throughout 
history are described in the article on Population. See aLso the articles on the 
various countries, states, and provinces for population details. 



This chart shows how the population of the world has 
grown since 2000 B.C. The increase was slow until 
A.D. 1, but by 1000 the population had more than 
doubled. It doubled again between 1650 and 1850. 
Between 1850 and 1966, the population almost 
tripled. At the present rate of increase, the world's pop- 
ulation will be about 6,000,000,000 by the year 2000. 



1000 B.C. 

121,000,000 



A.D. 1 

133,000,000 



A.D. 1000 

275,000,000 



A.D. 2000 

6,000,000,000 



344h 



25 LARGEST COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD IN POPULATION 



Rank Country Population 

1 . China 700,000,000 

2. India 489,254,000 

3. Russia 232,500,000 

4. United Slates 1 96,759,000 

5. Pakistan 1 07,009,000 

6. Indonesia 1 06,777,000 

7. Japan 97,91 3,000 

8. Brazil 82,696,000 

9. Nigeria 58,950,000 



Rank Country Population 

10. Germany, West 57,845,000 

11. Great Britain 54,108,000 

12. Italy 51,369,000 

13. France 47,920,000 

M.Mexico 42,244,000 

15. Philippines 32,926,000 

16. Turl&lt;ey 32,264,000 

17. Spain 31,839,000 

18. Poland 31,711,000 



Rank Country Population 

19. Thailand 31,647,000 

20. Egypt 30,270,000 

21. Korea, South 29,095,000 

22. Burma 25,01 6,000 

23. Argentina 23,035,000 

24. Iran 22,857,000 

25. Ethiopia 21,950,000 

Population figures are 1966 estimates based 
on the most recent otiieial statistics. 



25 LARGEST COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD IN AREA 



Greenland, a county of Denmark, and Angola, an overseas province of Portugal, ore 
not independent nations. But they ore listed in this table because of their large areas. 



Rank Country 



Area 
(tquore miles) 



1 . Russia 8,649,500 

2. Canada 3,851,809 

3. China 3,691,502 

4. United Slates 3,675,633 

5. Braiil 3,286,478 

6. Australia 2,971,081 

7. India 1,262,274 

8. Argentina 1,072,070 

9. Sudan 967,501 



Area 
Rank Country (square miles) 

10. Algeria 919,593 

11. Congo (Leopoldville). . . 905,565 

12. Indonesia 894,644 

13. Saudi Arabia 870,001 

14. Greenland (Denmark) .. 840,001 

15. Mexico 761,602 

16. Libyo 679,360 

17. Iran 636,294 

1 8. Mongolia 592,665 



Rank Country 

19. Peru 

20. Chad 

21. Niger 

22. Angola (Portugal). 

23. South Africa 

24. Mali 

25. Ethiopia 



(sq 



Area 
uare miles) 

496,223 
495,754 
489,190 
481,352 
472,359 
464,874 
457,267 



COMPARING THE AREAS AND 
POPULATIONS OF THE CONTINENTS 



This chort shows that Asia has more land 
and more people than any other con- 
tinent. Europe is smaller than any con- 
tinent except Australia, but it has the 
second largest population. As a result, 
Europe has the highest population den- 
sity of any continent — 153 persons to 
the square mile. Africa, North America, 
South America, and Australia, in that 
order, rank after Asia and Europe in 
size of population. 



AREA {in square miles) 



POPULATION 



Africa 


^^7^10^^^^^^^^^ 




Antarctica 


Jsjooooo 


Asia 


Jl 7 53.000 




Australia 


HI 

J 2,971,081 


Europe 


_K063!oOO 


North 
America 


J9!363!oO^^^^^^ 


South 
America 


J6fi70fi0^^^ 



Africa 


31 1,300,000 






Antarctica 








Asia 


1,887,500,000 






Australia 


11,450,000 


Europe 


i 
621,000,000 


North 
America 


295,600,000 






South 
America 


1 68,200,000 



POPULATION DENSITY (persons to the square mile) 



Africa 






27 






Antarctica 






no permanent population 




Asia 






no 






Australia 






4 


Europe 






153 


North 


1 
32 


America 






South 




America 


24 



Papulation figuros aro 19G6 fstimatts based on the most recent nrCcial statistics. 



344' 




Sudan 



Costa Rica 



( ^^ The Races of the Wor 



Id 



The World's People Belong to Many Races. 

The roces are really subgroups of three main racial 
stocks. Each of these Boy Scouts represents a different 
country and a different racial subgroup. 



The World's People Speak Many Languages. 

The languages of these newspapers and magazines 
are, left to right, Italian, French, Spanish, Hebrew, 
Turkish, English, German, Chinese, and Greek. 



The three principal racial stocks of man are Cauca- 
soid, or white; Mongoloid, or yellow; and Negroid, or 
black. Throughout history, these groups have become 
greatly intermixed. As a result, many racial subgroups 
have developed. For example, Caucasians include the 
Nordics, Alpines, and Mediterraneans of Europe; the 
Ainu of Japan; the people of India and Ceylon; and 
the Polynesians of the Pacific Islands. 

All the continents have some people of all three main 
racial groups. Most North Americans are Caucasians, 
but the continent has many Negroes, and also Eskimos 
and Indians who are Mongolians. In Latin America, 
many Caucasians, Mongolians (Indians), and Negroes 
have intermarried. Most Europeans, Australians, and 
New Zcalanders are Caucasians. Most Africans north 
of the Sahara are Caucasians, but south of the Sahara, 
most of the people are Negroes. In southern and 
western Asia, most of the people are Caucasians. The 
rest of Asia has chiefly Mongolians. 

The main characteristics of the races are described in 
the article Races of Man. 







•^''msi'HrimnT^xmf-'rm^mjyn 




344J 




Nigeria 



@ 1964, National Council 
Boy Scouts of America 

Netherlands 



Japan 



The Languages of the World 



Scholars estimate that there are about 3,000 spoken 
languages. Some of these languages are spoken by only 
a few hundred persons. Thirteen languages are each 
spoken by over 50,000,000 persons. More people speak 
Chinese than any other language. English ranks next, 
followed by Hindustani, Spanish, Russian, German, 
and Japanese. The others are Arabic, Bengali, French, 
Indonesian, Italian, and Portuguese. 

The languages of the world can be grouped by 
families. About half the people of the world speak a 
language of the Indo-European family. It includes the 
Germanic languages, such as English, German, and 
Scandinavian; the Romance languages, such as French, 
Italian, and Spanish; and the Balto-Slavic languages, 
such as Russian, Polish, and Lithuanian. 

The Sino-Tibetan family, which ranks second in nu- 
merical importance, includes Chinese, Thai, Burmese, 
and Tibetan. The Semitic-Hamitic family, which ranks 
third, includes Arabic and Hebrew. 

For the origin and development of the world's lan- 
guages, see the article Language. 



Visitors to the United Nations may listen to trans- 
lations in any of five languages — Chinese, English, 
French, Russian, and Spanish. 

United Nations 




"1 Cumhuriyef « 



5rantfurtcrA«ft«n&gt;cinc 










yi 






&gt;K« 



^'m^ 



(^ 



«*^WTa,,^, J 








■"SB l**^.' 




1 



WORLD 



Life of the World 



The common needs and experiences of people bind 
them together in the human family that is called man- 
land. All people know the pull of hunger, the thrill of 
joy, and the drag of weariness. But different groups of 
people eat different foods, find enjoyment in different 
ways, and even sleep on different surfaces. Wherever 
people live, they have developed a particular way of 
life that suits them to their particular surroundings. 



^W The Cultures of the World 



The many different ways of life followed by groups 
of people make u|5 a wide variety o{ cultures. The culture 
of a people consists of all the group's activities, beliefs, 
customs, traditions, and traits. The people of some 
cultures prefer rice as their main food. People of other 
cultures think meat is the only "real food." In still 
other cultures, the people say the same thing about 
beans. Their eating customs may differ, but all people 
must satisfy a common need for food. Other common 
needs of the family of mankind include the need for 
companionship, the need for a feeling of security, and 
the need for opportimities to reproduce. The common 
needs of mankind unify all peoples, in spite of the dif- 
ferences in their cultures. 

The important elements of human life that combine 
in the development of cultures are described in the 
article Culture. For a description of the different ways 
of life in various parts of the world, see the separate 
articles on the continents and countries. 

The cultures of the world have been developing for 
thousands of years. Cultures became more complex as 
mankind learned more about his surroundings. Ways of 
life changed — sometimes rapidly and sometimes slowly 
— whenever a people learned new ways of meeting their 
needs or achieving their ambitions. Almost all impor- 
tant ideas or inventions developed by one culture .spread 
to other cultures. This spread of ideas, such as democ- 
racy or nationalism, and of inventions, such as printing 
or electric power, changed many cultural patterns. In 
fact, most of mankind's progress has resulted from a 
continuous exchange of ideas and inventions among 
the cultures of the world. 

Progress has taken place largely because human 
beings never lose certain fundamental parts of their 
culture. For example, after people have used fire to cook 
their food, they will always find some way to get fire. 
After people have learned how to farm, they will never 
go back to a society that lacks an agricultural system. 
After people have learned how to generate power from 
natural forces, they will find new ways to produce such 
energy. The details of a culture — matches, hybrid corn, 
or the steam engine — may be replaced or even forgotten. 
But fire, agriculture, and machinery will remain in .some 
form as long as human beings exist. 

Most peoples of the world have always been eager to 
develop new and better ways of doing things. .Since the 
mid-1 800's, the rate of change in developed cultures has 
increased rapidly. This rapid change has gone hand in 
hand with revolutionary developments of science and 
technology. During the same period, the exchange of 



ideas and inventions among the various cultures also 
has been rapid and widespread. Since about 1920, the 
airplane, motion pictures, radio, and television have 
greatly speeded cultural exchange. 

Today, the historic process of cultural exchange 
seems to be producing a trend toward a common world 
culture. Many differences among people are either dis- 
appearing or becoming national symbols. For example, 
the leaders of many African or Asian countries wear the 
costumes of their homelands on state occasions or at 
meetings of the United Nations. But in most African 
or Asian cities, businessmen and some women generally 
wear Western styles of dress. Different styles of cooking 
that were once found only in certain countries are be- 
coming common in other countries. Chinese and French 
cooking have become international, and Indian and 
Japanese foods are available in many cities of the world. 
American and European foods are familiar to many 
Africans and Asians. 

The trend toward a world culture worries some per- 
sons. They fear that a common culture might deprive 
mankind of a variety of interesting ways of life. But the 
belief is growing that the development of a world cul- 



The Cities of the World serve as centers of business, industry 
and government. People who live in cities ore accustomed to el- 
bowing their way through crowded streets. This Hong Kong scene 
is typical of city shopping areas throughout the Far East. 

Blat-k star 




ture would actually spread variety. If the trend con- 
tinues, the chief features of various cultures would no 
longer be confined to particular places. They would 
flourish in all parts of the world, and cultural variety 
would enrich life ever\'where. 



Ci ^ y) The Religions of the World 



All peoples have some form of religion as part of their 
culture. Religious beliefs meet the need of all men for 
answers to certain mysteries of life. Most religious teach- 
ings emphasize the importance of moral values, espe- 
cially in person-to-person relationships. The beliefs and 
teachings of religion help keep life moving smoothly in 
the various cultures of the world. 

The principal religions are practiced in all parts of 
the world, even though they center in various cultural 
regions. Christianity is more widespread than any other 
religion. But most Christians live in Einope, North 
America, or South .America. Most people of the Middle 
East and North Africa are Moslems, and follow the 
religion called Islam. Buddhism, Confucianism, and 



Hinduism are the chief religions of China, India, Japan, 
and most other nations of eastern and southern Asia. 

In some regions, two or more major religions have 
large numbers of followers. For example, Hinduism is 
the religion of the vast majority of the people of India. 
But millions of other Indians are Moslems. The most 
important religions of Japan are Shinto and Buddhism. 
But many Japanese are Christians, Confucianists, or 
Taoists. Jews consider Palestine to be the traditional 
home of their religion, Judaism. But most Jews live in 
other countries throughout the world. 

Many different religions ai-e practiced by the tribal 
peoples of Africa, Asia, Australia, North and South 
America, and the Pacific Islands. The religions of these 
tribal groups are closely linked with such practical needs 
as food, or the health of animals or crops. Many tribal 
religions teach morals and ethics that resemble those 
taught by more wideh' practiced religions. 

For a description of the beliefs, practices, and tradi- 
tions of the vai'ious religions of the world, see the article 
Reugio-\ and the separate articles on the different 
faiths. See also the Religion section of the various 
country and continent articles. 



The Farming Areas that surround most cities ore usually quiet 
places of natural beauty. There, life is unhurried. Most homes in 
countryside areas ore far from each other. Many farmers do their 
doily work alone, and rarely see their neighbors. 

David .1. Forl-orl. Mciikmij'vr 



The Tribal Villoge is ruled by customs that may be thousands of 
years old. Tribal people see no reason to change such customs. 
The tribal system still includes many African peoples, many peo- 
ples of the Pacific Islands, and various American Indians. 

United .N"ali&lt; 









^w&gt;¥:-i^. 






WORLD 



Arts and Recreation 
of the World 



Vltlus de Milo in the Louvre, Paris — Arthur Gritnn, FPG 

Art Museums in most countries are important cultural 
centers. There, thousands of persons may enjoy and 
study masterpieces of painting and sculpture. 



A world traveler may find that people of various 
countries enjoy many of the same activities in their 
leisure time. However, almost every country has certain 
arts, pastimes, or sports of its own. They usually reflect 
the national character, talents, or history of the people. 

In country after country, most people amuse them- 
selves with radio, television, or motion pictures. These 
are the most popular forms of entertainment almost 
everywhere. The people of most nations also take great 
pride in their art museums, libraries, theaters, and con- 
cert halls. These cultural centers preserve the traditional 
arts of a country. 

An American tourist hears the jazz music of his home- 
land almost eveiywhere he travels. Even in the com- 
munist coimtries, American music and popular dances 
are favorites of the young people. They rock and roll in 
Belgrade, Moscow, and Warsaw — and also in Capri, 
Istanbul, and Manila. In the same cities, many persons 
of all ages still prefer the music and dances that are 
traditionally Yugoslavian, Russian, Polish, Italian, 
Turkish, or Filipino. 

An American visiting Japan feels at home in a 
crowded stadium watching Japan's most popular sport 
— baseball. Most Japanese schoolboys know the fine 
points of baseball. But they also know judo, a tradi- 



tional Japanese form of wrestling. In Japanese cities, 
the tovirist sees large audiences at symphony concerts en- 
joying classical Western music. Many Japanese also en- 
joy the music that came to their country hundreds of 
years ago from China and India. Such music is played 
on drums, flutes, gongs, and guitar-like instruments. 
It usually accompanies the kabuki dramas that have 
been favorites in Japan since the early 1600's. 

A world traveler probably finds the greatest cultural 
contrasts in the African countries. An African tribe may 
prize the transistor radio that sei-ves its village. But it 
still depends on the bush telegraph (messages sent by 
drums) to communicate with other villages. In many 
African cities, motion pictures are popular and tele- 
vision is a growing fonn of entertainment. But crowds 
still gather around skillful storytellers who recite the 
folk tales that make up much of Africa's traditional litera- 
ture. Even more important than folklore to Africans are 
their music and dances. These activities are vital parts 
of most African religious ceremonies. 

In Latin America, the culture of today is mixed with 
cultures of the past. The Latin-American cultural mix- 
ture can be easily seen in Mexico. There, many of the 
magnificent, modern buildings are decorated with vivid 
carvings, mosaics, and paintings. These decorations em- 




Unilod Pri-ss Int. 



M. Tatch. FPG 




phasize Aztec, Maya, or Toltec designs or symbols. 
Many modern buildings rise next to churches or man- 
sions built in the elaborate style of the Spanish colonial 
era. From the Spanish conquerors of their land, Mexi- 
cans also took much of their basic music and many of 
their dances. The Mexican love for bullfighting also 
comes from the .Spanish era. Today, Mexico has about 
200 bullfighting arenas, including one that seats 50,000 
persons — the largest in the world. 

For many centuries, Europe has been the center of 
the arts of Western civilization. The origins of most 
European literature and drama were in ancient Greece. 
Europe was the birthplace of today's highly developed 
forms of symphony, opera, and ballet. European mu- 
seums exhibit masterpieces of painting and sculpture 
from all parts of the world. Most European cities have 
many famous churches and historic palaces. Some 
of Europe's fashionable boulevards have American- 
style hamburger stands. But the sidewalk cafes of Paris, 
and the coflcc houses of Vienna still symbolize the 
traditional leisure-time activities of many Europeans. 

The arts, recreation, and sports of each country are 
described in the World Book country and continent 
articles. See also Art a.nd Arts; Music; Painting; 
Sculpture; Sports and Sportsmanship. 



Soccer ranks as one of the most popular sports 
in the world. It Is the major sport in most of the 
countries of Europe and South America. 



Motion Pictures are a favorite form of enter- 
tainment in many countries. Japan produces 
more movies than any other notion. 



The Olympic Gomes are the world's most im- 
portant international sports events. The first re- 
corded Olympic race was held in 776 B.C. 

John G. Zimmerman, Sports Iliustrated 




349 



I 



hT&gt; 



\ 



iL 



Uf 



/ 



% 



% n. 



WORLD 



Education and 
Science of the World 



^f 





Kiich ITaninann. Magnum 

Students of Many Lands attend colleges or universities far 
from tiieir iiomes. They take part in tiie worldwide exciiange of 
educational opportunities conducted by tfie major countries. 



The search for knowledge has always been a basic 
activity of man. For thousands of years, man has been 
discovering, classifying, and organizing information 
about himself and the world around him. Such scien- 
tific knowledge most often is used to satisfy the needs of 
people and to enrich life everywhere. 

Scholars often trace progress through the ages by 



studying the growth of knowledge from generation to 
generation. At times, information may accumulate 
slowly. At other times, some scientific discovery may 
add greatly to man's store of knowledge. The Industrial 
Revolution resulted from the advances of science and 
technology during the late 1700's and 1800"s. During 
the mid-1960's, the growth of scientific knowledge was 




? Fuundation 



Scientific Cooperation in the Antarctic is 
producing important discoveries that help in- 
crease man's knowledge about the world. 



Cnmmiiiiiratinns SaleMite Corp. 

The Communications Sateiiite is opening 
the way for rapid exchange of news and knowl- 
edge among all the nations of the world. 



SO rapid that it was called the "knowledge explosion." 
The rate of scientific development may be seen by 
comparing the number of technical journals published 
at various times. Such journals keep scientists and edu- 
cators up to date on current developments in their fields 
of knowledge. In 1850, about 1 ,000 journals were pub- 
lished in the different countries. By 1900, the nimiber 
had grown to about 10,000. In 1965, more than 50,000 
scientific and technical journals were being published. 
The worldwide exchange of knowledge illustrates the 
extent of international scientific cooperation. Such co- 
operation includes a wide range of important activities 
that generally cross political boundaries. Scientists and 
educators of the most advanced nations constantly ex- 
change information about space travel, the use of 
atomic energy, or methods of removing salt from sea 
water. An outstanding example of such cooperation was 
the International Geophysical Year (IGY). This pro- 
gram, held in 1957 and 1958, was a joint effort by the 
scientists of 66 nations. Working together, they made 
many important discoveries and worked otU the first 
complete world weather maps. See International 
Geophysical Year (IGY). 

International scientific cooperation is vital to the 
millions of persons who live in the underdeveloped 
countries of Africa, Asia, or Latin America. Scientists 



and educators of the developed countries conduct many 
programs to assist their associates in nations where 
progress has been slow. In the underdeveloped coun- 
tries, educators are helped to teach people to read and 
write. Doctors are helped to solve public health prob- 
lems, and agriculturists are helped to increase the food 
supply. See Technical Assistance; Illiteracy. 

The international exchange of students is one of the 
most important activities of worldwide scientific and 
educational cooperation. During the mid-1 960's, more 
than 250,000 students a year were studying in countries 
other than their own. Many of these students were young 
people of the underdeveloped countries. The United 
States, Great Britain, and .Russia are among the leading 
hosts to exchange students. Each year, about 90,000 
foreign students enroll in U.S. colleges or universities, 
about 15,000 in Great Britain, and about 30,000 in Rus- 
sia. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) serves as a clearing 
house for many student exchange programs. 

UNESCO is one of many international organizations 
that promote educational and scientific programs. The 
United States belongs to more than 50 of these groups. 

For the details of the world's educational and scien- 
tific development, see the articles on Education and 
Science, and the separate country articles. 



350a 



WORLD 




A Large Labor Force is one of fhe main elements 
in the economic life of a developed country. Japan's 
labor force includes many skilled workers. 



Consulate General or Japan, N.Y. 



1^^ The Wealth of Nations 



Economists generally divide the countries of the world 
into two groups — rich nations and poor nations. They 
usually call the rich nations "developed" and the poor 
nations "'underdeveloped" or "developing." In the 
Free World, about 20 major countries make up the 
group of developed nations. This group includes the 
United States, Canada, Japan, and the principal coun- 
tries of Western Europe. More than 85 major countries 
are generally considered underdeveloped. They include 
most of the countries of Africa, Asia, and Latin America, 
and a few countries of Western Europe, such as Greece, 
Portugal, and Spain. 

The nations are classified largely on the basis of their 
annual per capita (for each person) income, or their per 
capita Gross National Product (GNP). Income is 
money, goods, or sei'vices received in return for labor or 
the use of other resources. GNP is the value of all goods 
and services produced by a country during a year. A na- 
tion's per capita income or per capita GNP is its total 
income or total GNP divided by its entire population. 

Among the developed nations, the United States has 
the highest annual per capita GNP — about 13,000. The 
per capita GNP of the developed countries of Western 
Europe is about half that of the United States. The per 
capita GNP of the underdeveloped countries is generally 
difficult to deteiTnine. But the per capita income of 
most underdeveloped countries is less than $500, and 
in some is less than $100. In contrast, the per capita 
income of the United States is more than $2,400. 

Russia and the other communist dictatorships are 

350b 



hard to classify by the same economic yardsticks that 
are used for the Free World nations. Under communism, 
the government usually owns the property and means of 
production. However, economists of the United Na- 
tions estimate that industrialized communist countries, 
such as Russia and Czechoslovakia, have a per capita 
income of from $600 to $800 annually. 

The per capita income or GNP of a country does not 
always give a complete picture of a nation's economy. 
For example, on the basis of per capita income, the 
small, oil-rich sheikdom of Kuwait, on the Persian Gulf, 
is the richest country in the world. The per capita in- 
come of Kuwait is over $2,700 a year — higher than that 
of the United States. But most of Kuwait's people are 
poor, and most Americans enjoy the highest standard of 
living of any people in the world. Americans, as indi- 
viduals, control the income of the United States. It goes 
directly to the people, who spend their income — after 
paying taxes — as they please. Almost all of Kuwait's 
income is eained from selling government-controlled pe- 
troleum and goes to the government. The Kuwait gov- 
ernment spends much of its income on the education 
and technical training of its people. With such training, 
the government expects to develop a labor force capable 
of manufacturing a variety of products needed in other 
countries. After Kuwait staits to manufacture such 
products, it may be able to build a flourishing world 
trade. Then Kuwait will no longer need to depend on 
petroleum for almost all its income. 

Although economists usually group nations according 



^M^im^^Mi 



i^:fs*fe=ss£f^g«»^* I 




MiMi^iiy fur Fnreisn Affair- 

Natural Resources may be vital to the development of 
a nation's economy. Lumber cut from the vast forests of 
Sweden is basic to many Swedish industries. 



Capital is a chief economic element. It includes factories, 
tools, supplies, and equipment as well as money. The steel 
mill is an important form of industrial capital. 



to their per capita income or GNP, no one can really 
estimate the wealth of any nation. By wealth, econo- 
mists mean what man can produce to satisfy his needs 
and desires. A rich country produces an abundance of 
food, clothing, shelter, and the goods and services that 
its people enjoy. A poor country produces so little that 
many of its people often do not even have enough food. 

In eveiy country, man is the central figure in pro- 
ducing wealth. Every nation has some system to organ- 
ize the production and distribution of products needed 
bv its people. The various kinds of economic systems, 
and their achievements and problems, are described in 
the article Economics. 

The nature, quality, and location of a country's natu- 
ral resources have much to do with its economic strength. 
Generally, the developed countries of North America 
and Europe have excellent farmland. Most of these 
countries also have plentiful supplies of minerals, espe- 
cially- coal and iron ore, that are needed by their manu- 
facturing industries. But such industries use enormous 
quantities of minerals. Many of the developed nations 
must import much of their petroleum and other min- 
erals from underdeveloped countries. A number of 
underdeveloped countries have large reseives of these 
minerals. 

The size of a counti-y's population may seriously 
affect its economic development. In most underdevel- 
oped countries, for example, the population increases 
faster than the supply of food, year after year. In Asia, 
the problem of increasing food production is especially 



Bethlehem Steel Corp. 



difficult because of the limited amount of farmland. In 
many parts of Africa and Latin America, much unused 
fertile soil could be cultivated by clearing, draining, or 
irrigating the land. In almost every poor country, more 
food could be grown if farmers planted better seed, and 
used fertilizer and modern machines. But such improve- 
ments require expensive research and large amounts of 
money, and the underdeveloped cotmtries generally 
lack such fluids. Also, their farmers need training in the 
use of modern agricultural methods. This training takes 
a good deal of time. 

Certain basic economic problems faced by underde- 
veloped countries have been solved by developed coun- 
tries. Belgium and The Netherlands rank among the 
richest nations of the world in terms of per capita in- 
come. But in one way these countries are like many 
underdeveloped countries — they do not grow enough 
food to feed their people. To solve this problem, they 
specialize in manufacturing, using large amounts of 
capital and the highly developed skills of their workers. 
Belgium and The Netherlands trade heavily with other 
nations. They exchange their manufactured goods for 
the food and raw materials they lack. 

All poor countries are tning to increase the ability of 
their people to produce \sealth. The rich nations are 
sharing in that task. They provide capital and technical 
advisers to help underdeveloped nations help them- 
selves. Probably the most important problem of the 
world today — aside from preventing war — is promoting 
the economic development of the poor countries. 



350c 



^p^^ The Economic Development of Nations 



A nation may become economically strong by using its 
resources efficiently and developing many industries. 
These two pages compare Brazil, a country that is making 
progress in industrial development, with the United States, 
the leading industrialized nation of the Free World. 



"•^i'JSw.' 



^4^y 




UNITED STATES 

Gross National 

Product 

$518,200,000,000 



Ford Motor L... 



Industrialization forms the basis of the American economy. The 
Ford Motor Company's River Rouge plant near Detroit is prob- 
ably the world's largest manufacturing establishment. 



BRAZIL 

Gross Notional Product 
$24,400,000,000 




: UN' Vt-aibonk of National Aceounts Slalislics. 

196;i. 
Brazil's GNP reflects purchasing power of cruzei- 
ros in U.S. dollars. Manufacturing — by Itself — 
makes up 28 per cent of (he total GNP of the 
United States. The manufiicturing percentage for 
Brazil is not available. 



MAJOR ELEMENTS OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 



Resources Development 



LAND USE 



WATER 
POWER 



Labor Development 



Foretts 32% Failure 27% 

Forests 61% 




Manutocturing 26 
WORKERS BY 

INDUSTRIES Monufocluring 
13% 

Technological Development 



Undeveloped 69 

Undeveloped 98% 



I Agriculture 
11% 



Agriculture 56% 



United States ■■ Brazil 

Cropland 20% Other 21% 

I Posture Crojp.a&gt;d ^,^, ,,^ 



Developed 31% 



Developed 
|2% 



Other 63% 



Other 29% 



ELECTRICITr 
GENERATED 

k^^'h per capita 



OUTPUT PER 

MAN-HOUR IN 

MANUFACTURING 

lvalue added) 



RAILWAY 
DENSITY 

Miles of track 
per l.OOO sq. mi. 



TELEPHONES 

Per 100 population 




MOTOR 
VEHICLES 

Per 100 population 5 

Education and Health Development 



LITERACY 



DAILY 

NEWSPAPER 

CIRCULATION 

Per 1.000 population 



PHYSICIANS 
&amp; DENTISTS 

Per 100, DUO population 



LIFE 
EXPECTANCY 




Female 46 years 



35oe 



The Work of Nations 

The economy of every nation is made up of all the 
activities that produce wealth. These activities are 
called industries. The chief industries include agriculture, 
manufactiuing, mining, transportation, and many kinds 
of services needed by the people. 

The developed coimtries have a wide variety of in- 
dustries. Most of their industries use skilled workers and 
modern machineiy to produce vast quantities of food 
and manufactured goods. The imderdeveloped coun- 
tries are generally agricultural. More than half their 
people live and work on fanns. Almost all underdevel- 
oped coimtries are making progress towaid becoming 
industrialized. Some, including Argentina, Brazil, thile, 
India, and Mexico, have reached a fairly advanced 
stage of industrialization. These countries produce 
many of the manufactured goods that their people use. 
In most underdeveloped countries, some farm prod- 
ucts are sold to other countries in exchange for manufac- 
tured goods that are needed locally. An underdevel- 
oped country may also produce certain agricultural 
products almost entirely for export. Such products grow 
well in the countiy's climate and soil. They include 
the coffee of Brazil and Colombia, the nibber of Ma- 
laysia, and the bananas of Central American countries. 
Or, a country with large deposits of petroleum or other 
minerals may mine those minerals chiefly for export. 

The industrialization of a countiy usually takes place 
step by step. The exports of an underdeveloped country 
bring in capital that can be used to develop manufac- 
tiuing industries. The money received in exchange for 
the exports helps pay for the machines, equipment, and 
supplies needed to build and operate factories. Private 
capital and government aid from the developed coim- 
tries also help finance industrialization. 

During the early stages of a nation's industriali- 
zation, the chief goods manufactured are those most 
needed locally. Such goods include beverages, processed 
foods, shoes, textiles, and wood products. At a later 
stage, intermediate goods are manufactured. Intermediate 
goods are those used to manufacture other goods. Im- 
portant intermediate goods include cement, chemicals, 
petroleum products, and machine tools. At about the 
same stage of development, some plants may assemble 
automobiles, radios, refrigerators, or stoves. The parts 
for those products ai'e imported. 

As industrialization advances, the manufacturing in- 
dustries use more and more machineiy operated princi- 
pally by electric power. At this stage, a country's in- 
dustries may produce most of its steel and much of its 
machinery, paper, plastics, and electronic and transpor- 
tation equipment. Local industries may also process 
some mineral deposits, and even import minerals for 
processing. Such processing industries refine copper or 
iron from ores, or gasoline from petroleum. 

The industrial progress of most imderdeveloped coun- 
tries is hampered by lack of electric power, inadequate 
transportation, and a shortage of water supplies. In- 
dustrial production is low largely because most of the 
nation's workers have no technical training. Machineiy 
breaks down frequently, and there are long delays in 
making repairs. Few persons have had any experience 
in dealing with such emergencies. 

In spite of serious handicaps, most underdeveloped 

35of 



countries have developed some manufacturing indus- 
tries. Thus far, however, the great majority of their 
people have been little affected by industrialization. 
The industries are located in a few large cities, and most 
of the people live in rural areas. 

Most industrial progress in the underdeveloped coun- 
tries has occurred since World War II ended in 1945. 
By the mid-1 960's, these nations were producing about 
1 5 per cent of the world's manufactured goods. The de- 
veloped countries were producing about 85 per cent of 
such goods. 

The industries of the developed countries have great 
advantages over those of the imderdeveloped countries. 
More than 65 per cent of the world's industrial energy 
is produced in the United States, Canada, Japan, Rus- 
sia, and Western Europe. That energy is produced 
chiefly from coal, oil, natural gas, or water power (see 
Energy). The U.S. factoiy worker probably uses about 
20 times as much industrial energy as does the worker in 
an underdeveloped country. The developed countries 
also have most of the world's transportation facilities. 
Of about 755,000 miles of railroads in the world, about 
560,000 miles are in North America, Europe, Austra- 
lia, and New Zealand. Of about 135,000,000 motor 
vehicles in the Free World, about 125,000,000 are in 
the United States, Canada, Japan, Australia, New 
Zealand, and Western Europe. 

For infoimation about the agriculture, manufactur- 
ing, mining, and natural resources of every countiy of 
the world, see the separate country articles. For charts 
showing the leading crop growing and industrial coun- 
tries, see Agriculture: Industry. 



The Interdependence 



^S 



of Nations 



The nations of the world depend on each other for 
many goods and services. This international exchange 
is carried on through world trade. Most economists be- 
lieve that a nation strengthens its economy by trading 
with other nations. 

In the mid-I960's, the goods exchanged by the na- 
tions of the world each year totaled over $150,000,000,- 
000. About 70 per cent of these goods were exports of 
the developed countries of the Free World. Exports of 
the underdeveloped countries accounted for about 20 
per cent of the total world trade. Exports of the commu- 
nist nations made up about 10 per cent. 

Almost all the exports of the imderdeveloped coun- 
tries are farm products or minerals. Most exports of 
the developed countries are manufactured products. 
'Fhe underdeveloped countries sell most of their exports 
to the developed countries. In this way, they exchange 
farm products and minerals for manufactured goods. 
But most exports of the developed countries are sold to 
other developed countries. There is still only a small 
market for manufactured products in the underdevel- 
oped countries, because most of their people are poor. 
Most persons in the developed countries have relatively 
high incomes. They can afford to buy a wide variety of 
manufactured goods, such as automobiles, television 
sets, or household appliances. 

The developed countries constantly compete in the 



world market with up-to-date electric computers, jet 
airplanes, sports cars, or synthetic materials such as 
nylon and rayon. The underdeveloped countries lack 
the industrial strength to produce manufactured goods 
for the world market. These nations are trying to in- 
crease their share of world trade by speeding their 
industrial progress. But they are so far behind that they 
need help from the developed nations. Without such 
aid, the underdeveloped nations will remain largely 
agricultural. If they fail to progress industrially, their 
people — about two-thirds of the world's population — 
will probably continue to have a low standard of living. 

The developed nations conduct large assistance pro- 
grams to aid the underdeveloped countries. This help 
amounted to more than $6,000,000,000 a year during 
the mid-1 960's. Most of this assistance is used to develop 
large-scale public works such as highways, railroads, 
and hydroelectric plants. All these help in the indus- 
trialization of a developing country. 

Much economic aid to underdeveloped countries is 



WORLD 

administered by the United Nations and other interna- 
tional organizations. The UN Special Fund finances in- 
dustrial research, surveys of natural resources, and 
technical training programs to teach modern methods 
of farming or manufacturing. The underdeveloped na- 
tions get financial aid from institutions such as the 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Develop- 
ment, also called the World Bank. In addition, most 
developed countries make direct grants and loans to 
the underdeveloped countries. Investments in the mines 
and industries of many underdeveloped countries are 
made by private firms of developed countries. Many 
large industrial companies of the developed nations also 
build factories in the underdeveloped countries. Some 
companies operate branch factories in these coimtries. 
For the details and history of international economic 
assistance, see Foreign Aid; International Mone- 
tary Fund; Cold War (Economic Power). 



MAJOR ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS OF THE WORLD 



Many nations are members of economic groups called common mar- 
kets. As a rule, a common market unites countries of a certain re- 
gion. The chief purpose of a common market is to stimulate the in- 



dustrial growth of the entire region. The members of most common 
markets agree to remove tariffs and other trade barriers within 
the group. The mop, below, shows five common market regions. 







WORLD BOOK map 



European Economic Community (EEC), better known as the 
Common Market or the Inner Six, is mode up of Belgium, France, 
Italy, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, and West Germany. EEC was 
formed in 1957. Greece and Turkey ore associate members. 
European Free Trade Association (EFTA), also called the 
Outer Seven, is composed of Austria, Denmark, Great Britain, Nor- 
way, Portugal, Sweden, and Switzerland. EFTA was established in 
1 959 in Stockholm. Finland became an associate member in 1 961 . 
Latin-American Free Trade Association (LAFTA) unites 
nine nations in an economic alliance. lAFTA was formed in 1 961 by 
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay. 
Colombia and Ecuador joined later that year. 



Central American Common Marlcet (CACM)is on economic 
alliance of five countries — Costa Rico, El Salvador, Guatemala, 
Honduras, and Nicaragua. These nations signed several trade 
agreements between 1957 and 1962 that estoblished the CACM 
cooperative program. The official name of the alliance is The Gen- 
eral Treaty for Central American Economic Integration. 
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON) is on 
organization of Russia and eight other communist countries. It was 
formed in 1 949 to unite the economic efforts of Russia's satellite 
nations. COMECON members are Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East 
Germany, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, and Romania. Albania is 
also a COMECON member, but does not now participate. 



35og 




Friiuhj Grou,,, a sl.'UUf hy Hfiiry Moore 



WORLD 



Challenge of the World 



Man has achieved great success in his efforts to con- 
trol the physical world in which he lives. He can move 
mountains and create lakes, and he can send space 
capsules to the moon. But in spite of his scientific and 
technological progress, man has not been so successful 
in dealing with human problems. All humanity lives in 
dread of war, and more than half the peojilc of the 
world are hungry. 

The United Nations represents man's greatest effort 
to prevent war and to solve the problems of hunger, 
poverty, and disease. In 1965, the UN celebrated its 

35oh 



twentieth year as an organization of nations working for 
peace and security. The UN anniversary year was offi- 
cially designated International Cooperation Year. UN 
Secretai-y-General U Thant explained the origin and 
the purpose of the observation in these words: 

"•i)ay after day we read and hear so much about con- 
flict and strife in this world that we sometimes do not 
realize the vast extent to which peoples are working 
together. It was Prime Minister Nehru of India 
(Jawaharlal Nehru (1889-1964]) who, more than three 
years ago, drew attention to the quiet way in which 



cooperation does in fact go on between countries. He 
then proposed that one year be devoted to calling more 
attention to this international cooperation, especially 
for peace and in the interest of peace. 

"... I am not going to ask yon to believe that inter- 
national cooperation is easy, even outside the political 
field. It requires strenuous and continuing efforts by 
people from many lands and many cultures. It is a 
course with many hurdles. In traversing this course, 
we must be prepared for setbacks as well as triumphs. 
... If humanity is to survive, and to make progress, 
the peoples of the United Nations have no choice but 
to cooperate." 

International Cooperation Year was inaugurated at 
ceremonies held at United Nations Headquarters in 
New York City. At the ceremonies, seven prominent 
men, each from a different cultural region, lectured on 
"International Cooperation in Our Time." These out- 
standing men contributed important opinions on vital 
problems facing the people of the world. The editors of 
World Book have selected parts of each lecture that 
help set forth the challenge of the world today. 

Alberto Lleras Camargo, former president of Colombia: 

". . . Today it is not only the heads of government 
or their immediate collaborators who can talk about 
national problems, but an army of technicians who 
have woven a network of complicated international 
communications beneath the foreign offices that is the 
despair of diplomats, but which is doing more to create 
a world more suited to the needs of mankind than all 
the treaties ever signed. That is the world of inter- 
national cooperation. ... It is a world composed of 
modest workers, technicians, people of good will, men 
and women in sweaters, without diplomatic unifomis, a 
vast middle class that will prove its unity to the world, 
its ability to an increasing human race, attest to its 
modernity, its sense of justice and organization. 

"There is no longer any way clearly to define and 
mark the fields of international cooperation, for daily 
they become more and more fused with people's activi- 
ties. This is the great humanist revolution in the sense 
that nothing human is alien. Culture, science, educa- 
tion, agriculture, international trade, atomic energy, 
cartography and the measurements of the planet, 
space, the rights of oppressed and unprotected minori- 
ties, migratory currents, statistics, fertility problems and 
mortality rates, narcotic drugs, special care for children, 
colonialism, labor, transport, international currency, 
encouragement and development of backward peoples, 
telecommunication, meteorology, the law of the sea, 
are not national problems but international questions. 
. . . The interest of all peoples lies in their study and 
adequate solution so that no one, on the pretext of 
sovereignty, can interrupt or hold back the achievement 
of human destiny. . . ." 

Gabriel Marie d'Arboussier, /ormfr minister of justice 
of Senegal: 

"It is for us . . . to see that eveiything man knows, 
that is to say, everything man can do, no longer con- 
flicts with what he is, but allows his being to grow to 
fit the dimensions of his world. . . . Man's new dimen- 
sion is no longer that of the individual or the particular 
moment, or even that of the nation, at a specific point 
in a temporal process. His dimension is that of the 
world and of the conquest of time. The great movements 



WORLD 

that are sweeping our world along are therefore forcing 
man, in order to avoid destruction, to exercise his power 
on a world scale to master the future — and even the 
past, by abolishing or redeeming it. 

". . . Let us then create more and more institutions, 
public or private, that can support the work of the 
United Nations. Let us exchange our young people. 
Let us pair our cities. And let us bring together our 
intellectuals, our workers, our women, in order ... to 
stimulate due interest in every act of international 
cooperation. 

"... International cooperation is the only solution 
to the crises which continue to paralyze and vex the 
world, for it attacks them at their roots. The United 
Nations, which has already gone through a number of 
crises, will never see the end of them unless international 
cooperation becomes a reality and a rule of life for all 
states." 

Edgar Faure, former premier of France: 

"... Cooperation means recognizing the other per- 
son; it means recognizing him wherever he may be. The 
choice is indivisible, and the application is universal. 
This truth imposes itself today on the mind of men. 

"For it is wrong to think, as people are all too apt to 
say automatically, that man has made progress in power 
and techniques only. He has advanced by leaps and 
bounds in intelligence and lucidity, in the thirst for 
knowledge and the ability to understand. Those who 
contest this fact are basing themselves on an aristocratic 
concept of culture. They call to mind the procession of 
thinkers who have dominated their century and they 
say: 'They will never be surpassed.' . . . They forget 
that if there is to be much humanism there must be 
many humanists. They do not give a thought to the 
multitude of humble souls who are just beginning to 
have some glimmering of those "lights' which only used 
to appear so sparkling because they were parsimoniously 
distributed. 

". . . The civilizations of the past were imperfect 
civilizations. They were civilizations for the use of their 
elite only and within the limits of their territory. Now, 
for the first time, we see the makings of a civilization 
without frontiers or watertight compartments, universal 
in both the extent of its geographical dimensions and 
the depth of its social dimensions. Cooperation means 
nothing else but that. . . . Just as famines and economic 
crises have been warded off, so we shall perhaps find out 
one day that the crises of civilization are not fatal 
either." 

Mohammed Kamel Hussein of Egypt, a professor of 
surgery: 

"International cooperation is the great creation of 
our age, and only our age could have created it. At no 
other time has the world possessed the resources, ma- 
terial and scientific, iiecessaiy for the successful execu- 
tion of this remarkable concept. Never before were na- 
tions ready, morally and psychologically, to offer aid to 
other nations on such a scale, having been for centuries 
conditioned to look upon each other as rivals and poten- 
tial enemies. 

"". . . What will the world be like in the next 20 
years? I am convinced that cooperation will have de- 
veloped into partnership between nations in all that 



3501 



WORLD 

is great or worthwhile. Teamwork, in which the com- 
petence and not the nationality of participants is the 
prime consideration, will be the universal rule as it is 
now in all major scientific work. Great sources of energy 
will be available to all, and may actually be pooled 
when necessaiy. Enterprises useful to all the world, such 
as desalinization of seawater, will have been achieved 
with the fullest international partnership. I believe that 
people will get into the habit of agreeing together. Dis- 
agreement is, in some cases, a bad habit developed 
through the tradition of rivalry betw een nations. 

"I am also convinced that in a few years' time, there 
will no longer be any talk of thermonuclear war. People 
will wonder what the scare was all about. I do not 
think that there will ever be any such war. The circum- 
stances which can render nuclear war necessary are 
inconceivable. No purpose can ever be served by world- 
wide devastation. The degree of hatred or enmity be- 
tween nations will have to reach red heat before such a 
war is waged, and this will never take place once people 
work together peacefully and usefully." 

A. K. Brohi of Pakistan, a lawyer: 

"Man is living in an electronic age. The scientific and 
technological revolution of our time, by annihilating 
distance, has reduced the planet on which man's lot is 
cast to the size of a sort of vast but over-congested 
global village. The network of communications which 
girdles the planet, thanks to electronic technology, has 
brought about what is, after all, a new phenomenon in 
history — an extension of the brain of an individual man, 
as a sovereign source of contact and communion with 
the total family of mankind. Few there are who are 
meaningfully aware of the implications of this extension 
and the capabilities of man. His eyes today can see what 
is happening anywhere, his ears can hear what is said 
anywhere, and his words can be, in turn, heard all over 
the globe. His muscle-power is steadily being withdrawn 
from processes which contribute to the production of 
wealth and the servicing of human needs. The produc- 
tion of goods is being increasingly handed over to auto- 
matic machines and the labor force supplied by man is 
now seen steadily withdrawing its support from the 
stimulation of economic activity. . . . (It) is being 
progressively made available to the sei-vice of the higher 
operations of the life of man. His time, his energy can 
now be employed in the service of the higher life of the 
mind, of the soul, and of the spirit. 

"... The whole of earth is now the home for man to 
serve the higher purposes of realizing the oneness of 
mankind, no matter where he is. The earth sustains him 
and, today, the food that he nourishes upon comes from 
different parts of the world. The ideas and the informa- 
tion on which depends the growth of his mental life are 
contribiUed by thinkers \\ho are working in different 
parts of the world. 

"... The ideal for the modern man, then, is to con- 
tribute to the making of humanity. He can make an 
effective contribution towards its growth and develop 
ment if he conceives of himself as a serviceable element 
in a wider synthesis which is no other than the total life 
of mankind. This is another way of saying that we have 
to realize the Divine in histoiy and so establish the 
Kingdom of Heaven on earth." 



Mikhail Dmitrievich Millionshchikov »/ Russia, a 
physicist: 

"... The energy resources available to mankind 
today are very unevenly distributed and even more un- 
evenly used. Asia, the most populous part of the world 
. . . accounts for less than one-tenth of the world's elec- 
tric power output. Although the populations of North 
America and South America are roughly equal, the 
former produces about 20 times more electricity a year 
than the latter. Particularly disturbing is the fact that 
this discrepancy is almost nowhere being reduced, while 
in places it is increasing. 

"... The rapid rate of growth of the population of 
our planet makes the food problem particularly acute. 
And this is not due to the scarcity of food resources, but 
to the unsatisfactory way in which they are utilized. . . . 
Yet if all existing material, scientific and technical re- 
sources were mobilized and properly distributed, the 
problem of food would be completely solved in a short 
time. 

". . . Undernourishment, a low level of living, and 
disease form a vicious circle of their own. Himdreds of 
millions of people in the countries of Asia, Africa, and 
Latin America are suffering from trachoma, malaria, 
tuberculosis, leprosy, and sleeping sickness. It is pre- 
cisely those countries that are worst off for medical care. 

"... The further advance of scientific knowledge is 
a basic prerequisite for all social progress today; this will 
apply more strongly tomorrow. Consequently, no matter 
how much . . . energy must be expended on grappling 
with the vital problems of the present day, and the 
feverish eveiyday rush, man remains the custodian of 
ideas and scientific foresight. The scientific and tech- 
nological revolution is still in its infancy; it is only be- 
ginning to turn into a second industrial revolution. 
Nevertheless, we can already see that there is a direct 
cause-and-effect relationship between the thoroughness 
of scientific research and the scale of change in the de- 
velopment of social productive forces. . . . The isolation 
of scientific thought must become a thing of the past. 
Common sense demands that all scientists should be 
brought into extensive contact with one another. 

". . . In our era, science is called upon to revolu- 
tionize not only the economic, social, and political 
life of society, but also its very way of thinking. By pene- 
trating and dominating all spheres of social activity, 
scientific reason, as the most highly organized and most 
disciplined mode of thought, can and must help to find 
a rational solution for the problems of mankind." 

Walter Lippmann of the United States, a commentator on 
world affairs: 

"... When we look beneath the surface, we shall see 
that there is imderway what we may call the Great 
Revolution, and it is upon this Great Revolution that 
we must rely to bring about peace and stability on 
which eventually the universal society can flourish. 

". . . What is the Great Revolution? It is a radical 
change in the human condition. It is a product of man's 
advancing knowledge, his knowledge of how to control 
the material conditions of his life on earth. 

". . . The modern age differs from all the ages that 
have gone before in that the conquest of poverty has 
for the first time become a rational object of policy for 
all states. This has come about because of a conjimcture 
of discoveries and inventions arising from new knowl- 



35OJ 



edge, from the sciences and the arts which have to do 
with the conscious and deliberate regulation of human 
aft airs — the regulation of the growth of population and 
the planning of its environment. 

". . . If the universal society is to live and flourish, it 
must have some more interesting thing to do than to 
stand by, and now and then to intervene in some quar- 
rel when it breaks out. Defense is a primary and indis- 
pensable fimction of any organized society. But not 
defense alone. No less indispensable is the promotion of 
the welfare of the members of the society. This is true 
of all organized governments, and it is true of the United 
Nations. While the United Nations must do what it can 
to influence the powers to make peace, while it must do 



WORLD 

what it can to keep the peace, while it must rally its 
whole power and influence to avert big war, it will not 
live by peace alone. That is too gray a horizon. The 
horizon should be vivid with splendor and hope. The 
masses of mankind from the poorest to the richest are 
preoccupied above all else with the problem of living 
with this Great Revolution which brings the promise 
and the prospect of the fulfilment of their hopes. With 
these promises and these prospects of the Great Revolu- 
tion, the United Nations must identify itself." 

Phillip Bacon, Paul Bohannan, Stewart E, Fraser, and 

Ravmund F. Mikesell 



WORLD 



Study Aids 



Related Articles. For detailed infoiTnation about the 
physical world, see E.\rth with its list of Related Articles. 
For the story of man's progress, see World, History' oi-; 
Prehistoric Man; Civilization with their lists of Re- 
lated Articles. See also the foUowine;: 

Countries and Continents 

See the separate articles on each continent, country, 
and dependency listed in the Nations oj the World section 
of this article. 





Regions 




Arctic 


Far East 


Pacific Islands 


Balkans 


Latin America 


Southeast Asia 


Central America 


Middle East 




Other Related Articles 


Agriculture 


Industry 


Population 


Anthropology 


International Law 


Public Health 


Art and the Arts 


International 


Races of Man 


Clothing 


Relations 


Religion 


Communication 


In\cntion 


Science 


Community 


Language 


Shelter 


Conservation 


Law 


Technology 


Culture 


Man 


Trade 


Economics 


Medicine 


Transportation 


Education 


Migration 


United Nations 


Food 


Olympic Games 


War 


Go\*ernment 


Peace 

Outline 




1. Nations of the World 




M. Geography of the World 




111. People of the 


World 





A. The Population of the World 

B. The Races of the World 

C. The Languages of the World 
IV. Life of the World 

A. The Cultures of the World 

B. The Religions of the World 
V. Arts and Recreation of the World 

VI. Education and Science of the World 
VII. Economy of the World 

A. The Wealth of Nations 

B. The Economic Development of Nations 

C. The Work of Nations 

D. The Interdependence of Nations 
VIII. Challenge of the World 

IX. Study Aids 

Questions 

How much of the earth's surface is covered by water? 
What is the largest country? The smallest country? 



Who worked out the first complete world weather 
maps? 

What is the largest continent? What is the smallest 
continent? 

What are some of the languages in the Indo-European 
language family? 

What three oceans make up the world ocean? 

What is the most densely populated continent? 

How are the rich countries helping the poor countries 
speed their industrial development? 

What was the purpose of International Cooperation 
Year? 

Why do most people of the world li\c on plains or in 
hilly regions? 

Books for Young Readers 

Bacon, Phillip, ed. Golden Picture Atlas of the World 
Golden Press, 1960. 6 vols. 

Epstein, Edna. The First Book of the United Nations 2nd 
rev. ed. Watts, 1963. 

Hyde, Margaret. This Crowded Planet. McGraw, 1961. 
This book describes the problems of the great increase 
in the world's population. Exploring Earth and Space. 
3rd ed. McGraw, 1963. This book describes the scien- 
tific studies conducted by the International Geo- 
physical Year. 

Life (Periodical). The Epic of Man: Special Edition for 
Toung Readers. Golden Press, 1962. An illustrated 
survey of human history. 

Sechrist, Elizabeth, and Woolsev, Janette. It's Time 
for Brotherhood. Macrae Smith, 1962. This book de- 
scribes individuals and organizations devoted to fur- 
thering understanding among peoples. 

Books for Older Readers 

Bohannan, Paul. Africa and Africans. Doubleday, 1964. 

A survey of the background of African life and culture. 
Cooke, Alistair. One Man's America. Knopf, 1952. Views 

on American life and manners. 
Fr-^ser, Stewart E., ed. Governmental Policy and Interna- 
tional Education, ^ohn Wiley, 1965. 
Gaer, Joseph. What the Great Religions Believe. Dodd, 

1963. An introduction to the major beliefs of some of 

the world's great religions. 
Mikesell, Raymond F., ed. U.S. Private and Government 

Investment Abroad. LIniv. of Oregon Books, 1962. 
Morgan, Murray. Doctors to the World. Viking, 1958. A 

description of the activities of the World Health 

Organization. 
Ward, Barbara. The Rich Nations and the Poor Nations. 

Norton, 1962. This book describes the political and 

economic problems of the underdeveloped nations of 

the world. 



351 



WORLD 
HISTORY 




The conlnbulor aj this arltclf is T. W'altfr W'allbank, 
Professor Emeritus of History at the University of Southern 
California. 



WORLD, HISTORY OF. The historv- of the world is the 
stor\- of man — from the first civilization to the Space 
Age. The stor\' covers a period of about 5,000 years, 
beginning about 3000 B.C. At that time, or even a little 
earlier, men developed a way to write down their ex- 
periences. Those early writings began the record of 
man's progress that we study today as world history. 

Before the development of writing, human beings had 
existed for at least 500,000 years — a hundred times 
longer than the total span of recorded history. The long 
period before writing began is called Prehistoric Times. 
Scientists have pieced together the stor&gt;' of that period. 
Life during Prehistoric Times is described in the article 
Prehistoric Man. 

World history shows that civilization today is the 
product of many cultures. For thousands of years, var- 
ious peoples have borrowed ideas and inventions from 



Ancient Times 




Major Developments of World History 

This fable shows highlights of the progress of man from the beginning of recorded 
history to the present — from the first civilization to the Space Age. The table 
covers obout 5,000 years. Many dotes shown in this toble are approximate. 



ROMAN EMPIRE 17 B.C.-A.D. 476 
I I 

HAN DYNASTY 206 B.C.-A.D. 221 
I 
MAURYA DYNASTY 322-185 B.C. 
I 
HELLENISTIC AGE 323-146 B.C. 
I 
PERSIAN EMPIRE 539-330 B.C. 

CHALDEAN EMPIRE 612-539 B.C. 

HELLENIC AGE 750-338 B.C. 

ASSYRIAN EMPIRE 910-612 B.C. 



[^^ 



I 

"-7- CHOU DYNASTY 1027-256 B.C. 

PHOENICIAN EMPIRE 1200-842 B.C. 

HWANG VALLEY CIVILIZATION — CHINA 1500-1027 B.C 

INDUS VALLEY CIVILIZATION-INDIA 2500-1500 B.C. 



AEGEAN CIVILIZATION-EUROPE 3000-1100 B.C. 

J . 1 



NILE VALLEY CIVILIZATION-EGYPT 3100-1090 B.C. 



TIGRIS-EUPHRATES VALLEY CIVILIZATION-MIDDLE EAST 3100-1200 B.C. 



1000 B.C. 



The gray har. show, appronlnutrly. the years eovered by each major di-vel..pnienl. The bars with broken ends indicate contlniilnE developments. 



each other. This exchange is called culture diffusion. 
See Culture (How Cultures Grow and Change). 

Throughout most of world history, the most impor- 
tant regions for new ideas and inventions were the 
Middle East, Egypt, India, and China. But during 
Modern Times — the period of the last 500 years — 
Western civilization has made rapid progress, while 
other civilizations lagged. As a result, the course of 
culture diffusion changed. During Modern Times, the 
flow of ideas and inventions has swept from West to 
East. The development of worldwide systems of com- 
munication and transportation conquered barriers of 
time and distance. 

Mankind's progress through the centuries has been 
marked by many changes, and eveiy generation has 
faced the challenge of serious problems. Great civiliza- 
tions have developed, flourished for a time, and then 



collapsed. International disputes have brought on terri- 
ble wars. In every age, millions of persons have suffered 
hunger and hardship, while others enjoyed prosperity. 
Today, we live in the greatest civilization of all times. 
But war and widespread poverty still are the most im- 
portant problems of mankind. Man has greater knowl- 
edge and more technological power than ever before. 
As a result, he probably has a better chance to meet the 
challenge of today than any generation of the past. 

This article deals broadly with man's progress from 
Ancient Times to the present. It provides general infor- 
mation on how civilized ways of life developed and 
advanced in various regions of the world. It describes 
how these cultures mingled and made lasting contri- 
butions to later civilizations. Separate World Book 
articles, especially the articles on each coimtry, provide 
details about the major events of world history. 



Middle Ages 



Modern Times 



SUNG DYNASTY 960-1279 



TOLTEC AND AZTEC EMPIRES 900-1521 
EXPANSION OF MOSLEM EMPIRE 750-1258 

T'ANG DYNASTY 618-906 

I I 

BYZANTINE EMPIRE 330-1453 

1 
GUPTA EMPIRE 320-535 




SPACE AGE 1957- 

KOREAN WAR 1950-1953 

COLD WAR 1945- { 

UNITED NATIONS 1945-!" 

WORLD WAR II 1939-1945 

I 
WORLD WAR I 1914-1918 

EUROPEAN COLONIAL EXPANSION 1870-1914 
! __' 

NAPOLEONIC EMPIRE 1799-1815 
I 
LATIN-AMERICAN WARS OF INDEPENDENCE 1791-1824] 

I 
FRENCH REVOLUTION 1789^1799 
I 
AMERICAN REVOLUTION 1775-il783 



INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION 1750- 

I 



MANCHU RULE OF CHINA 1644-1912 j 

ENGLISH REVOLUTION 1^42-1689 

l\ I 

THIRTY YEARS' WAR 1618-1648 

I , 
MOGUL EMPIRE 1526-1857 
i 
VOYAGES Olj DISCOVERY 1487-1522 

I . 

OTTOMAN EMPIRE 1326-1922 ! 

2)1_- RENAISSANCE 1300-1600 

MONGOL EMPIRE 1279-1368 

CRUSADES 1096-1291 





WORLD HISTORY/ 




'Ancient Times 



The greatest cultural journey of all times took place when man crossed 
the gulf between barbarism and civilization. The development of civi- 
lization was made possible by the invention of farming. After men dis- 
covered ways to grow crops and raise animals, they no longer had to 
roam in search of food. They could settle down in villages. Some became 
farmers and herdsmen. Others became craftsmen, merchants, religious 
leaders, teachers, soldiers, or government officials. They developed the 
skills, tools, beliefs, and laws that produced the early civilizations of 
mankind. In these civilizations, the first cities were built and the first 
nations were organized. Some nations of Ancient Times expanded into 
empires that spread over large parts of the world. 

The early civilizations made many contributions to later generations. 
Probably the most important of these contributions was the invention of 
a system of writing, about 3000 B.C. At that time, man started to write 
down a record of his life. The year 3000 B.C. opened the period called 
Ancient Times or Ancient History. According to most historians, this period 
ended at about a.d. 476. 

The development of Western civilization was strongly influenced by 
many peoples of Ancient Times. Among them were the Sumerians, 
Babylonians, Egyptians, Hebrews, Phoenicians, Assyrians, Chaldeans, 
and Persians. As civilization advanced, the Greeks and the Romans 
originated many arts and sciences that became basic to Western ways of 
life. Important cultures also developed in the eastern part of the world — 
in India and China. Almost from the beginning of Ancient Times, many 
peoples of the West and the East exchanged ideas and inventions, and 
the cultures of the world mingled. 



Ruins of a Roman Temple in Baalbek, Lebanon 







»Lj^wr 









3,52 b 



Cradles of Civilization 



The first important civilizations of the world de- 
veloped in four river valleys. These valleys were (1) the 
land between the Tigris and the Euphrates rivers in the 
Middle East, (2) along the Nile River in Egypt, (3) 
the vast region watered by the Indus River in India, and 
(4) along the Hwang Ho (Yellow River) in China. 

The four valleys are generally known as the "cradles 
of civilization." The valley civilizations of the Middle 
East and Egypt formed the basis for present-day West- 
ern civilization. The Indus civilization formed the basis 
of the civilization of what is now India and Pakistan. 
The Hwang Ho civilization developed into the present- 
day Chinese civilization, and strongly influenced the 
civilization of Japan. 

While civilization was developing in the four valleys, 
people in most other parts of the world were still follow- 
ing primitive ways of life. Little cultural progress was 
being made in such regions as northern and central 
Europe, central and southern Africa, northern and 
southeastern Asia, or most of North America. In parts of 
Central and South America, some civilized ways of life 
\\ere developing. But they did not become advanced 
civilizations until hundreds of years later. 

The Middle East of ancient times was made up largely 
of the fertile valleys of the Tigris and the Euphrates 
rivers. The area curved from the southeastern end of the 
Mediterranean Sea around the Arabian Desert to the 
Persian Gulf. Because of its shape, the ancient Middle 
East became known as the Fertile Crescent. Today, 
this region includes Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, and 
Syria, and part of Turkey. For a description of the 
ancient region, see Fertile Crescent. 

The birthplace of the Middle East civilization was 
Sumer, in southern Mesopotamia (now Iraq). The 
Sumerians probably migrated to Mesopotamia from the 
highlands of what is now Iran or Turkey. By 3000 B.C. 
they had built an advanced civilization of independent 
city-states. These city-states had no central government 
or tmified army. As a result, .Sumer was unable to resist 
invasions by envious neighbors. About 2300 B.C., Sumer 
was conquered by a famous empire builder, Saigon of 



Sargon of Akkad was the 

first great empire builder of 
liistory. He conquered Sumer 
about 2300 B.C. Country after 
country then fell to Sorgon's in- 
vading armies until he ruled 
most of the Middle East. 

Directorate. General of Antiquities, 
Govei-nment of Iraq 





The Cradles of Civilization: 1. the Tigris and Euphrates Valleys, 
2. the Nile Valley, 3. the Indus Valley, 4. the Hwang Valley, 



MAJOR EVENTS OF ANCIENT TIMES 



c. 3100 B.C. Cuneiform writings of the Sumerians began the 

recorded history of the Middle East. 
c. 3100 B.C. King Menes united Lower and Upper Egypt, and 

formed one of the world's first national governments. 
c. 2500 B.C. The Indus Valley civilization of India began in 

the cities of Haroppa and Mohenjo-daro. 
c. 2300 B.C. Sargon of Akkad conquered the Sumerians and 

united their city-states under his rule, 
c. 1750 B.C. Hammurabi established the Babylonian empire, 
c. 1600-1400 B.C The Minoan civilization flourished on the 

Mediterranean island of Crete. 
c. 1500 B.C. The Aryans of central Asia invaded India, 
c, 1 500 B.C The Shang dynasty began its 500-year rule of 

China. 
1000's B.C Latin tribes settled south of the Tiber River, and 

Etruscans settled in the northeastern region of the 

Italian peninsula. 
750-338 B.C Athens, Corinth, Sparta, and Thebes developed 

as the chief city-states of Greece during the Hellenic 

Age. 
509 B.C. The Latins rebelled against their Etruscan rulers and 

established the Roman Republic. 
338 B.C Philip II of Macedonia defeated the Greeks and 

mode Greece part of the Macedonian Empire. 
331 B.C. Alexander the Great defeated the Persians at 

Arbela (Irbil), and opened his path of conquest to 

northern India. 
322-185 B.C. The Maurya Empire of northern India spread 

over all India and part of central Asia. 
221-207 B.C. The Ch'in dynasty established China's first 

strong central government and completed the Great 

Wall that protected China from invaders. 
206 B.C The Han dynasty began its 400-year rule of China, 
146 B.C The Romans destroyed Corinth and conquered Greece, 
55-54 B.C. Julius Caesar led the Roman invasion of Britain. 
27 B.C. Augustus became the first Roman emperor, 
A.D. 70 Roman forces under Titus captured and destroyed 

Jerusalem. 
78-200 The Kushan empire ruled Afghanistan and north- 
western India. 
105 The Chinese invented paper, 
293 Diocletian divided the Roman Empire into four prefectures 

and set up two capitals — Nicomedio in Asia Minor, and 

Milan in Europe, 
313 Constantine granted the Christians of the Roman Empire 

freedom of religion in the Edict of Milan, 

320 India began its golden age under the rule of the Gupta 

dynasty, 
395 The Roman Empire split into the Eost Roman Empire and 

the West Roman Empire. 
476 The German chieftain Odoocer deposed Romulus, the last 
( emperor of the West Roman Empire. 



352C 




WORLD, HISTORY OF 

Akkad. Another invader, Hammurabi, conquered 
Sumer about 1750 B.C. Hammurabi made Babylon his 
capital, and the region became known as Babylonia. 

Both Sargon and Hammurabi helped presei-ve and 
advance the Sumerian civilization. Sargon united the 
city-states under a strong central government. Ham- 
murabi organized hundreds of laws, most of which were 
originated by the Sumerians, into one code (set) of laws. 
The Code of Hammurabi established what was probably 
the world's earliest social order based on the rights of the 
individual. The code influenced the laws of many coun- 
tries for hundreds of years. See Hammurabi; Sargon. 

The Sumerians also probably invented the first system 
of writing, called cuneiform (wedgelike) Nvriting. With 
this writing, men started the record of events that make 
up written histoiy. Many clay tablets with cuneiform 
writing have been found in the Middle East. These 
tablets reveal the high development of early Middle 
East civilization. They include hundreds of financial 
documents, and many studies in astronomy, mathe- 
matics, and medicine. Some of the first literature of 
world history also was written by the Sumerians and 
Babylonians. This literature includes the famous Epic 
of Gilgamesh. One of the Gilgamesh stories describes a 
great flood, similar to the stoiy of a worldwide flood 
told in the Old Testament. For descriptions of the many 
achievements of the Babylonians and the Sumerians, 
see Babylonia; Sumer. 

For several hundred years after 1200 B.C., no single 
i-uler controlled the Middle East. As a result, several 
peoples developed important cultures in various parts of 
the region. Of these peoples, the Hebrews and the Phoe- 
nicians had a great influence on future civilizations. 

The Hebrews, also called Jews, developed and spread 
their idea of one God. The Jews worshiped one God 
during a time when most other peoples worshiped many 
gods. Judaism also put great emphasis on the ideals of 
brotherhood, charity, human dignity, and universal 
peace. These ideals became the chief elements of moral 
living for many persons of future generations. 'Fhe 
Hebrew Bible, or Old Testament, became a basic part 
of Christianity, the most widespread religion of Modern 
Times. Islam, the religion of the Moslems, was built on 
Judaism and Christianity. See Jews. 

The Phoenicians became famous for two achieve- 
ments — their alphabet and their great colonial empire. 
The Phoenician alphabet was the basis of the Greek 
alphabet. All other Western alphabets developed from 
the Greek alphabet. The colonial empire of the Phoeni- 
cians was one of the first links between civilized areas in 
Ancient Times. The Phoenicians were great explorers 
and traders. Their ships sailed throughout the Medi- 
terranean Sea and around the west coast of Africa. The 
Phoenician empire consisted of many colonies and trad- 
ing posts. One of the most important Phoenician colo- 
nies was Carthage. See Phoenicia. 

Three empires rose to power during the period when 
small nations were important in the Middle East. The 
first of these empires was built by the Assyrians. By 700 
B.C., they had become the masters of the Fertile Cres- 
cent. The Assyrians conquered and ruled many peoples 
by terror. Their cruelty to captives was a form of what 
is now called psychological warfare. The Assyrians were 

352d 



conquered by the Chaldeans about the year 612 B.C. 

Nebuchadnezzar II, the famous ruler of the Chal- 
deans, rebuilt Babylon as a magnificent city. His royal 
palace was surrounded by terraced gardens. These 
gardens, known as the "hanging gardens of Babylon," 
became one of the ancient Seven Wonders of the World. 
The Chaldeans made important discoveries in astron- 
omy and believed they could foretell the future by 
studying the stars. They probably invented astrology. 
Chaldean rule of the Middle East ended in 539 B.C. 
after the Persians captured the city of Babylon. 

The Persians ruled about 200 years, and their empire 
spread over all the Middle East. They built excellent 
roads that supplied their vast empire with a communi- 
cations network. Unlike the Assyrians, the Persians 
ruled the many peoples of their empire sternly but with 
justice, not by terror. The Persians became famous for 
developing an efficient system of government. Their 
theories of justice were guided by the teachings of their 
religion, Zoroastrianism (see Zoroastrians). 

Egyptian Civilization developed in the rich valley of 
the Nile River. The kingdoms of that region were united 
under a single ruler, Menes, about 3100 B.C. Egyptian 
pharaohs ruled Egypt until about 1090 B.C., except for 
a period of about 160 years. The Hyksos invaded Egypt 
during this period (see Hyksos). After about 1090 B.C., a 
succession of conquerors ruled Ancient Egypt. 

The Egyptians built one of the world's great early 
civilizations. The huge pyramids near the present site 
of Cairo show their engineering skill. The Egyptians 
probably invented post and lintel architecture, the basis 
of much present-day building (see Architecture 
[table. Architectural Terms (Post and Lintel)]). The 
Egyptians also were among the first people to use a 
type of paper, instead of clay tablets, for their records. 
They wrote on a paper made from the fibers of a water 
plant called papyrus. The Egyptians were great artists, 
astronomers, and engineers. They were great merchants, 
too. Their caravans carried goods throughout the vast 
desert regions surrcunding Egypt. Their ships sailed to 
the major ports of the world. Egyptian traders spread 
many elements of their culture among the peoples who 
lived along the rorUes of commerce, on both land and 
sea. See E(;yi't, Ancient. , 

The Indus Valley Civilization began about 2500 B.C. 
in the region that is now West Pakistan. Archaeologists 
have found Sumerian relics in the ruins of the Indus 
cities of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro. These relics show 
that the Indus people traded with the people of the 
Middle East. The Indus Valley cities had buildings 
made of brick, and efficient sewerage systems. The Indus 
people also developed a system of writing that has never 
been translated. 'The Indus civilization disappeared 
mysteriously about 1500 B.C. At about that time, the 
Aryans, ancestors of the present-day Hindus, invaded 
the Indus Valley. They came from the plains of Asia 
through the Himalayan mountain passes. The light- 
skinned Allans found many dark-skinned Dravidians 
living in northern India. 

Several features of life in present-day India developed 
in ancient times. Perhaps the most important was the 
custom of dividing people into separate social classes, 
called castes. The caste system of India today probably 
developed from Aryan rules that forbade intermarriage 
with the Dravidians. See Caste. 



The Hwang Ho Civilization probably began about 
the same time as the civilizations of the three other 
cradle valleys. But the earliest Chinese records date 
from only about 1500 B.C. Under the rule of the Shang 
dynasty (1500-1027 B.C.), the Chinese had a well- 
organized government and a system of writing. They 
worshiped a supreme god and other gods, including 
ancestral spirits. The early Chinese developed many 
arts. They were especially skilled at casting beaiuiful 
bronzes. The Chou dynasty ruled China from about 
1027 to 256 B.C. Many lasting features of Chinese life 
developed during this period. Probably the most im- 
portant early Chinese idea was a belief in a "Mandate 
of Heaven." According to that belief, if a ruler behaved 
badly, he no longer had the approval of the gods, and 
could be overthrown. The mandate was one of the first 
declarations of a people's right to revolt. 



^^^^ Civilization Advances 



From the cradle lands, civilized ways of life spread to 
many other regions of the world. Great civilizations rose 
in lands where barbarism had been the way of life for 
thousands of years. 

In Europe and Asia, many barbarians became civi- 
lized. They took over the ideas and inventions of the 
cradle civilizations, and also created cultural patterns of 
their own. In Europe, the Greeks and the Romans de- 
veloped most of the arts, philosophies, and sciences 
that became the chief ingredients of Western civiliza- 
tion. In Asia, the Indians and the Chinese developed 
lasting forms of art, government, and religion. 

As civilized cultures advanced and spread, the people 
of various regions often exchanged ideas or inventions. 
This mingling of cultures occurred through commerce, 
conquest, and migration. Traders carried the products 
of one culture to others over long routes of commerce. 
The soldiers of conquering armies often settled in lands 
far from their own. Large groups of people migrated 
from one region to another, and brought the customs of 
their homelands with them. Many adopted the ways of 
life of the people they joined. In this way, the develop- 
ing cultures of the world often mingled. 

The mingling of civilized cultures during Ancient 
Times was an important development in world history. 
Ever since, much of mankind's progress has been made 
by the exchange of ideas among the peoples of the 
world. See Migration. 

The Greel&lt;s developed the first advanced civilization 
on the European mainland, and made many contribu- 
tions to Western civilization. Their most important 
contribution probably was the idea of democracy. The 
ancient Greeks glorified individual freedom. They 
stressed man's right to criticize, be curious, and be 
difTerent. The Greeks thought deeply about such ques- 
tions as: What is the good life? What is beauty? What 
is truth? In pondering such questions, the Greeks de- 
veloped the study of philosophy. 

The right to think freely was basic in the work of the 
artists, scientists, and writers of ancient Greece. Demo- 
cratic ideas were also used in government. The Greek 
form of democracy in government differed from present- 
day democracy. But the Greeks set forth certain demo- 
cratic principles that are still followed today. 




ntal Institute, University of 
1 Egyptian Museum. Cairo. 

Scenes of Conquest carved on both sides of a slate tablet tell 
how King Menes united two warring Nile Valley states and estab- 
lished the Egyptian notion about 3100 B.C. Each picture is a sym- 
bol of a heroic deed of Menes. Such picture symbols formed the 
system of hieroglyphic writing developed in ancient Egypt. 




wide World 

Ruins of Mohen|o-darO, a center of the ancient Indus Valley 
civilization, still stand in present-day West Pakistan. The brick 
buildings of the city are at least 4,500 years old. 



A Shong Dynasty Bronze shows the skill of 
ancient Chinese artists who perfected their style 
of carving during the 1 500's B.C. This wine 
vessel is only about six inches tall. 

The Art Institute of Chicago, i.ucy Maud Bucltingham Collection 




3-52e 



WORLD, HISTORY OF 

In developing their great civilization, the Greeks 
freed themselves from traditions of the past. As a result, 
the Greeks produced new and lasting forms of art, 
politics, and science. 

Greek civilization grew out of an early civilization 
called the Aegean Civilization (3000-1100 B.C.). The 
most important center of the Aegean Civilization was 
the Mediterranean island of Crete. The people of Crete 
built their culture on the ideas and inventions of the 
cradle civilizations of Egypt and the Middle East. 

Crete became the stepping stone of Western civiliza- 
tion. The island linked Europe with Egypt and the 
Middle East. From about 1600 to 1 100 b.c, people from 
the European mainland often raided Crete. They inter- 
married with the Cretans and became the people we 
call Greeks. The Greeks developed their great culture 
on the European mainland in such city-states as Athens, 
Corinth, Sparta, and Thebes. See Aegean Civiliza- 
tion; Crete. 

The ancient Greeks called themselves Hellenes, and 
their homeland was known as Hellas. The period of 
Greek histoiy from 750 to 338 b.c. is called the Hellenic 
Age. During this period, Greek culture reached great 
heights of development. Greek armies and traders col- 
onized many areas along the Mediterranean and Black 
seas. As ancient Greece expanded, the leaders of the 
powerful Persian empire tried to take over the countiy 
and its colonies. A long war between the two nations 
ended with the defeat of the Persians in 479 B.C. 

After the Persian defeat, Athens became the leading 
city of Greece. During the Golden Age of Greece (461- 
431 B.C.), magnificent buildings were constructed and 
great works of art and literature were produced. No 
culture has produced so many lasting achievements in 
such a short period. From the Golden Age of Greece 
came the great works of men such as Aeschylus, Eurip- 
ides, Herodotus, Phidias, Socrates, and Sophocles. The 
period is often called the Age of Pericles, after the bril- 
liant leader of the Athenian government. See Golden 
Age; Pericles. 

The progress and riches of Athens were the envy of 
the other city-states of Greece. Hostility between the 
Athenians and their fellow Hellenes led to the Pelo- 
ponnesian War (431-404 B.C.). Athens was defeated in 
that war. The victorious city-states soon started to quar- 
rel among themselves. However, the political quarrels 
did not halt the work of Greek scholars. Aristotle and 
Plato produced their great philosophical works during 
this period. 

In 338 B.C., the quarreling Hellenes were conquered 
by invaders from Macedonia, led by Philip II. His 
son, Alexander the Great, became the ruler of Greece. 
Alexander expanded his empire throughout the Middle 
East and Egypt, and as far east as northern India. 
Under Alexander and his successors, Greek culture 
spread and combined with other cultures. This great 
period of Greek civilization became known as the 
Hellenistic Age. The largest city of Hellenistic Greece 
was Alexandria, in Egypt. Alexandria was the home of 
some of the great scientists of Ancient Times. There, 
Eratosthenes estimated the circumference of the earth, 
and Euclid developed the fundamentals of plane geome- 
try. The Hellenistic Age began about 323 b.c. and ended 

352f 



about 146 B.C., when the Romans conquered Greece. 

For a description of life in ancient Greece and the 
story of how Greek civilization developed, see the article 
Greece, Ancient. 

The Romans were people of the Italian peninsula 
whose culture had lagged far behind that of the Greeks. 
It took them more than a hundred years to conquer all 
the empire that had flovnished during the Hellenistic 
Age. The Romans invaded Greece about 146 B.C. and 
completed their conquest about 30 B.C. They adopted 
Greek forms of art and literature, and Greek archi- 
tectural methods. A culture known as the Greco- 
Roman culture developed. The Romans built well- 
planned cities, massive aqueducts and bridges, and 
vast systems of roads. They became famous for their 
civic buildings, municipal baths, hospitals, stadiums, 
and triumphal arches. Greco-Roman sculptors created 
lifelike statues and portraits in marble. Famous Roman 
writers included Cicero, Julius Caesar, Livy, Ovid, 
Tacitus, and Virgil. Latin, the language of the Romans, 
became the basis of the Romance languages of today. 

At the height of their power, the Romans ruled a vast 
empire. The Roman Empire was truly a "world state." 
It included many countries with widely different cus- 
toms. The Romans showed careful respect for these cus- 
toms, and they won the good will of many of the people 
they governed. The Romans generally ruled with a 
strong sense of justice and order. 

The Roman legal system became the basis of the legal 
codes of many present-day European and Latin- 
American countries. Roman laws were enforced by 
efficient public officials. Many political terms that are 
common today originated in Rome. They include such 
words as plebiscite, census, consul, municipal, and senate. 

One of the most important contributions of the Ro- 
mans to Western civilization was the preservation of 
Christianity. Christ was born during the reign of the 
Emperor Augustus, and was crucified during the rule of 
Tiberius. The early Christians were persecuted by the 
Romans. But Christianity eventually became the official 
religion of the Roman Empire, and spread throughout 
the world. It became a major ingredient of Western civi- 
lization, and the world's most widespread religion. 

The development of Roman culture spanned a period 



The Triumphal Arch was an outstanding feature of Roman ar- 
chitecture. The famous Arch of Septimius Severus, built in A.D. 203, 
stood in the Roman Forum, center of government of ancient Rome. 




of about 2,500 years. This period probably began about 
2000 B.C., when people related to the Greeks migrated 
from Northein Europe to the Italian peninsula. The 
period ended in a.d. 476 after a Germanic conqueror 
overthrew the last emperor of the West Roman Empire. 
The East Roman Empire continued for another thou- 
sand years as the Byzantine Empire. For the dramatic 
story of how Rome grew from a small village in Italy to 
become the capital of one of the world's greatest em- 
pires, see the article Roman Empire. 

The Indians of Ancient Times made great progress in 
developing their civilized culture. They did so chiefly 
during the years of the Maurv'an and the Gupta em- 
pires. During the Mauiyan period, two of the world's 
most important religions — Hinduism and Buddhism — 
developed. The Mauiyan civilization reached its high- 
est development under Emperor Asoka, who spread 
Buddhism throughout India. Buddhism later spread to 
China and other eastern countries. Hinduism became 
the chief religion of India after Asoka's death. The 
teachings of these two religions and their importance to 
millions of persons throughout Asia are described in the 
articles Buddhists; Hindus. 

India's golden age developed during the empire of 
the Gupta dynasty (a.d. 320-535). Its center of learning 
was the city of Nalanda. Indian mathematicians in- 
vented the system of numerals that was later taken over 
by the Arabs and became known as the Arabic system. 
The Indians also invented the decimal systein, with a 
symbol for the zero. Poets, dramatists, and other writers 
produced many masterpieces of Indian literature in 
Sanskrit, the classical Indian language (see Sanskrit 
Language and Literature). Indian artists of the 
period created fine paintings and sculptures. Some of 
these ancient works may still be seen in Hindu temples 
and caves throughout India. 

The Chinese of Ancient Times, like the Indians, 
made important cultural progress under the rule of two 
dynasties. The vast country was unified and protected 
from invaders by the Great Wall of China during the 
Ch'in dynasty (221-207 B.C.). The unification of China 
led to the great advances made under the Han dynasty 
that followed the Ch'in period. 

During the 400 years of the Han period, many basic 
ways of Chinese life developed. Most of these ways of 
life came from the teachings of Confucius, one of the 
world's great philosophers. They included ancestor wor- 
ship and many rules of conduct that lasted in China 
until Modern Times. Confucianism became one of the 
most important religions of the world. See Confucianists. 
The Chinese philosophers and scholars of the Han 
period were among the first to organize the facts of 
nature into various subjects. These subjects included 
astronomy, botany, chemistry, and mineralogy. They 
also compiled one of the first dictionaries, and wrote the 
first scholarly history of China. 

The most famous invention of the Han period was 
paper, made for the first time from wood. During the 
same era, the Chinese invented a seismograph (an in- 
strument that records earthquakes). Another famous in- 
vention of the Han period was the breast-strap harness 
for beasts of burden. This invention allowed animals to 
pull heavy loads without choking. The Chinese used the 
breast-strap harness several hundred years before it be- 
came known in Europe or other civilized regions. 




Ballots Made of Broken Potfery were used by the citizens of an- 
cient Athens to get rid of any politician who began acting lil&lt;e a 
dictator. Whenever 6,000 or more ballots were cast against an 
Athenian official, he was sent into exile for 10 years. 









if*^ 




Eliot Elisofon, LIFE © Time Inc. 

A Sculptured Gateway of the Great Stupa, a famous Buddhist 
monument in India, was carved about 100 B.C. India was the birth- 
place of two great religions — Buddhism and Hinduism. Buddhism 
spread to China, and Hinduism became the chief religion of India, 



Paper was invented by the Chinese 
in A.D. 1 05. The first paper was 
made from the bark of mulberry 
trees. This fragment of Chinese paper, 
a treasure of the British Museum, is 
about 1 800 years old. 

© British Museum 





WORLD HISTORY 



P.I. p. Photos 



The A/l/c/c//e Ages 



Mankind reached another impurtant cuhnral landmark during the 
thousand-year period of the Middle Ages. The ideas and inventions of many 
peoples were brought together and combined. An important mixture of 
cultures formed a way of life in Western Europe known as medieval culture. 
Most historians set the beginning of the Middle Ages at about a.d. 476, the 
time of the fall of Rome. They end the period in the middle or late 1400's. 

Medieval culture was built on the ruins of the Greek and Roman civili- 
zations. Both these civilizations were almost destroyed during the early 
years of the Middle Ages. Those early years became known as the Dark 
Ages. During the Dark Ages, many fierce barbarian tribes roamed over the 
lands of the fallen West Roman Empire. Their conquests even threatened 
to wipe out civilization in Western Europe. 

At the same time that civilization was struggling to siu-vivc in Western 
Europe, civilized cultures were prospering in other regions. In southeastern 
Europe, the Byzantine Empire enjoyed great wealth. In the Middle East, 
a new empire — the Moslem Empire — climbed to great power. In the East, 
China's civilization reached new heights of achievement and Japan enjoyed 
its golden age. Unlike China, India was unable to continue its earlier im- 
portant advances. Internal warfare and many invasions slowed progress in 
India during most of the Middle Ages. 

Most regions of the world that were uncivilized during Ancient Times 
remained uncivilized during the Middle Ages. These uncivilized regions 
included much of the interior of Africa, and most of North America and 
South America. However, important civilized cultures were developed by 
the Aztec, Inca, Maya, and Toltec Indians in parts of Central America and 
South America. 



The Cathedral al Amiens, France 



French Government Tourist Office 



Carcassonne, in southwestern France, 
is the finest example of a medieval 
walled city in Europe. It stands on the 
site of a Roman city of the 400's. 




352h 



Western Europe During 
The Middle Ages 



Christianity was the most important civilizing force 
in Western Europe during the Middle Ages. After the 
fall of Rome, the Roman Catholic Chinch became 
much more than a religious institution. It became the 
most powerful political and social influence in the life of 
Western Einope. 

At first, the church converted the Germanic invaders 
of Rome to Christianity. Later, its missionaries spread 
Christianity among the barbarians of northern Europe. 
At the same time, much Greek and Roman scientific 
knowledge was preserved in the church's monasteries. 
For hundreds of years, Christian monks were probably 
the only scholars of Western Europe. 

The development of a new political system provided 
a crude form of law and order during the Middle Ages. 
This system, ciilled feudalism, replaced the governmental 
units of the Roman Empire. Under feudalism, almost 
all the land of Western Europe was governed and owned 
by the church or by powerful nobles. From time to time, 
landowning nobles gave land to other nobles in return 
for military assistance. Almost all the people worked as 
farmers and lived imder the protection of the nobles. 
The ruling nobles quarreled about land almost con- 
stantly. In most of these quarrels, the church acted as 
peacemaker to settle the disputes. See Feudalism. 

Dining the 600's, Palestine — the birthplace of Chris- 
tianity — came under Moslem rule. A desire by the 




-i-,U'&gt; 




Medieval Monks copied 
many manuscripts of Greek and 
Roman scholars, and preserved 
the knowledge of Ancient Times. 



J~^^ 






Moslem Scientists and phy- 
sicians were the leading schol- 
ars of the Middle Ages. They 
made many discoveries that ad- 
vanced astronomy and medicine. 

Courtesy of Smithsonian Inslilulion 




Empires of the Middle Ages: Byzantine Empire, A.D. 565 (gray); 
Moslem Empire, 750 (lined); Mongol Empire, 1294 (blue). 



MAJOR EVENTS OF THE MIDDLE AGES 



486 Clovis became king of the Franks and founded the 

Merovingian dynasty, rulers of the first French state. 
527-565 Justinian I ruled the Byzantine Empire and developed 

the famous Justinian Code of law. 
622 Mohammed, founder of the Islamic religion, fled from 

Mecca to Medina. Mohammed's flight, called the Heg/ro, 

marks the beginning of the Moslem calendar. 
611 The Omayyad Caliphate established the capital of the 

Moslem Empire at Damascus. 
711 The Moslems invaded Spain and began an occupation 

that lasted about 700 years. 
732 Charles Martel led the Franks in defeating the invading 

Moslems at Tours. The victory prevented the Moslems 

from conquering Europe. 
750 The Abbasid Caliphate replaced the Omayyads as 

rulers of the Moslem Empire, and established a new 

capital at Baghdad. 
c. 770 The Chinese invented wood-block printing. 
771 Charlemagne became ruler of the Franks. 
800 Pope Leo III crowned Chorlemagne Emperor of the Holy 

Roman Empire in the West. 
843 The Treaty of Verdun divided Charlemagne's empire 

into three parts, and began the national development of 

France, Germany, ond Italy. 
862 Rurik, chief of the Varangians (vikings), established his 

rule at Novgorod and founded the Russian Empire. 
878 Alfred the Great of England defeated the Danes in the 

Battle of Edington. 
969 The Fotimids conquered Egypt and mode Cairo the center 

of the Moslem Empire. 
987 Hugh Capet became king of France ond founded the 

Capetian dynasty that ruled until 1328. 
c. 1000 Leif Ericson sailed west from Greenland to the North 

American mainland. He was probably the first explorer 

to reach North America. 
1016 Canute became king of England and brought the entire 

country under Danish rule. 
1037 The Seljuk Turks conquered most of the Ironian kingdoms. 
1066 Norman forces under William the Conqueror defeated 

the Anglo-Saxons in the Battle of Hastings, and ended 

Anglo-Saxon rule of England. 
1099 Christian forces captured Jerusalem, ending the First 

Crusade. 
1 187 Moslem troops under Soladin recaptured Jerusalem. 
1 192 Yoritomo became the first shogun of Japan. 
1215 Borons of England forced King John to grant the Magna 

Carta. 

1279 Kubloi Khan led the Mongols in completing the conquest 
of China. 

1368 Ming dynasty established its 300-year rule of China. 
c. 1440 Johannes Gutenberg, a German printer. Invented 
movable type. 

1453 The Ottoman Turks captured Constantinople (Istanbul) 
and overthrew the Byzantine Empire. 



3521 



WORLD, HISTORY OF 

European nobles to free the Holy Land led to several 
militaiy expeditions against the Moslems. These ex- 
peditions, called the Crusades, brought Western Europe 
into contact with an advanced Moslem civilization 
(see Crusades). Many ideas and inventions of the Mos- 
lems were brought back to Europe by the crusaders. 
The Crusades also spurred European interest in trading 
with China, India, and other distant lands. This in- 
terest in world commerce encouraged explorers to find 
new trade routes to the East. It also revived European 
craftsmanship and manufacturing. As a result, many 
towns were built in Western European countries. 

A new class of people developed in the towns of West- 
ern Europe. This class consisted of craftsmen, mer- 
chants, and traders. Many people moved from the farm- 
lands to the towns. At the same time, many feudal lands 
were combined and formed large political units. These 
became states, such as England, France, Portugal, and 
Spain. As these states were established, nationalism and 
patriotism developed among their people. Such ideas 
became important forces in the political development 
of Europe during Modern Times. 

During the I300's, a new civilization was rising in 
Western Europe. Its moral and spiritual basis was pro- 
vided by Christianity. Its wealth and thriving cities were 
supported by widespread commerce. Its education and 
learning grew with the help of proud and nationalistic 
monarchies. In the new Western European civilization, 
the first important universities of Europe were estab- 
lished in Bologna, Cambridge, Heidelberg, Oxford, 



Paris, and other cities. There, scholars made important 
scientific progress, especially in geography, mathemat- 
ics, and medicine. Much of the scientific progress was 
based on scholarly achievements of the Moslems. From 
the Moslems, for example, Europe got its system of nu- 
merals and the decimal system. The Moslems had taken 
over those important systems from the Indian mathe- 
maticians of the Gupta dynasty. 

During the gradual development of medieval culture, 
several important European languages came into popu- 
lar use. Latin remained the language of the Roman 
Catholic Church and of most scholars. Popular lan- 
guages such as Italian, French, and Spanish developed 
from Latin. English came largely from Germanic lan- 
guages. Much important literature was written in the 
popular languages. Medieval literature included great 
epic poems, songs of the troubadours, and ballads about 
Robin Hood and other folk heroes. Two masterpieces 
of literature were written — Dante's Divine Comedy and 
Chaucer's Canterbuiy Tales. 

The most impressive feature of medieval culture was 
probably Gothic architecture. Gothic cathedrals, such 
as Canterbuiy, Chaitres, and Notre Dame of Paris, still 
stand among the finest buildings of the world. They 
combine many skills of medieval artists and craftsmen. 
Gothic cathedrals have towering spires, stained glass 
windows, and ornamental sculptured figures. Gothic 
architectiue largely symbolizes the great power of medi- 
eval Christianity and the strong religious feelings in 
\\xstern Europe during the Middle Ages. For a descrip- 
tion of life in Europe dining medieval times, see the 
ai'ticle Middle Ages. 




The Byzantine Empire 



Thousands of Crusaders marched through medievol Europe to- 
ward Palestine, hoping to free the Holy tand from Moslem rule. 



Southeastern Europe was the center of a strong em- 
pire during the Middle Ages. This empire grew out of 
the East Roman Empire. Its capital and military strong- 
hold was Constantinople (now Istanbul). Constanti- 
nople stood on the site of ancient Byzantium, and the 
new empire became known as the Byzantine Empire. 

The Byzantine Empire was the chief civilizing in- 
fluence among the Slavic peoples of Eastern Europe. 
There, civilization was spread mostly by missionaries of 
the Byzantine Church. Byzantine missionaries con- 
verted most of the peoples of the Balkans and Russia to 
Christianity. The Byzantine Church was united with the 
church at Rome for many years. But rivalries developed 
between the two groups, and in 1054 they became sepa- 
rated. The Byzantine Church later became known as the 
Eastern Orthodox Church. Its members still form the 
largest Christian group of Eastern Europe, and it has 
members in many other pai'ts of the world. See Eastern 
Orthodox Churches. 

Byzantine culture was a mixture of several cultures. 
The power of the Byzantine Empire \vas built on the 
Roman traditions of justice and a strong central gov- 
ernment. The Byzantine arts, including the famous By- 
zantine mosaics, combined Greek ai't forms with strong 
influences from the Orient. These influences were 
brought to Constantinojjlc chiefly by Byzantine traders. 
Their caravans traveled far into Central Asia, and their 
ships crossed the Black Sea and sailed many miles into 
the waterways of Russia. 



352J 



The Byzantine Empire was an important force in de- 
fending Western Europe from invasion during the 
Middle Ages. Many times, the B&gt;zantine annies threw 
back the Moslems and several barbarian tribes that 
tried to conquer their empire. If the Byzantine Empire 
had fallen to such invaders, Western Europe undoubt- 
edly also would have been overran. The Byzantine civi- 
lization flourished until Constantinople fell to the Turks 
in 1453. See Bvz.^ntine Empire. 



(((] jV) The Moslem Empire 



One of the most advanced cultures of the Middle 
Ages had its center in the Middle East. This important 
culture originated with the Arabs. They established a 
new religion, Islam, and converted millions of persons. 
The Arabs built a huge empire that grew larger than the 
Roman Empire of Ancient Times. From about 750 to 
the 1200"s, the Islamic empire extended from the At- 
lantic Ocean to the borders of India. The Islamic 
empire became known as the Moslem Empire. The 
term Moslem comes from the Arabic word Muslim, mean- 
ing one who submits (to God). The religious teachings of 
Islam are described in the article Islam. 

The vast expanse of the Moslem Empire brought 
many cultures together. Moslem culture was a mixture 
of the ancient cultures of the Middle East, Egypt, India, 
and China. It also included important contributions of 
Greek culture that had long been forgotten in Western 
Europe. For example, many writings of Aristotle and 
other valuable philosophical works were brought to 
Spain and Sicih' by the Moslems. Such works were then 
translated into Latin for European scholars. 

In addition to gathering and preserving many impor- 
tant cultural works, Moslem scholars produced great 
works of their own. The Arabs made a nmnber of con- 
tributions to the study of algebra. In fact, the word 
algebra is Arabic, and means transposing (see Algebra 
[Histor\']). A medical book written by Avicenna, an 
Arab scientist, was the chief text used by physicians for 
over 600 years. Avicenna and other Moslem scientists 
also wrote important textbooks on astronomy and math- 
ematics. Moslem geographies included the most com- 
plete maps of the world during the Middle Ages. 
Moslem poets, including Omar Khawam, wrote some 
of the world's literar)' masterpieces. Moslem art blended 
the artistic forms that had developed in Persia, the By- 
zantine Empire, Egi.-pt, and Spain. This blending 
created a distinctive style known as Islamic art. Its 
chief feature was ornamental design. Islamic artists de- 
veloped forms of design because their religion prohib- 
ited the creation of lifelike images of any creatures. The 
designs were used in painting, weaving rugs, brocading 
cloth, and decorating leather and fine pottery. The 
distinctive patterns of Moslem art also appeared in the 
magnificent tilework that decorated the mosques (Mos- 
lem houses of worship). See Islamic Art. 

Moslem traditions still strongly influence life in 
certain regions of the world. Most of the Middle East, 
for example, is known as the Arab ]Vorld. In Southeast 
Asia, and in such countries as India and Pakistan, 
Moslem ways of life are followed by millions of people. 
The development of the Moslem Empire during the 
Middle Ages is described in the article Moslems. 




Vow York PuhUr Library 

Medieval Society in Europe wos made up of several classes of 
people who were ruled by a king or a feudal lord — the central 
figure in the painting, above. At his right stand the clergymen who 
advised him, ond at his left ore the noblemen who led his armies. 
The lower panel shows merchants, left, and peasants, right. 




Justinian I ruled the Byzan- 
tine Empire during its Golden 
Age. He gathered many Roman 
lows into one legal code. The 
famous Justinian Code became 
the basis of the laws of most 
western European countries. 



Keproduotlon from Bi/zantine Point- 
ing, courtesy skLra Inc., New York 



A Persian Miniature shows Mohammed, founder of the Islamic 
religion, receiving a message from the angel Gabriel. Mohammed 
based his teachings on those of Jesus and the Hebrew prophets. 










China During 
The Middle Ages 



The civilized culture of ancient China advanced 
greatly during the Middle Ages. Chinese civilization 
progressed in spite of many invasions by fierce bar- 
barians, among them the Mongols and the Tartars. 
Most of the invaders adopted Chinese ways of life. 
Some, especially the Mongols, spread Chinese civiliza- 
tion to many other lands. 

The Mongols conquered all China in 1279, and their 
famous ruler, Kublai Khan, built a vast empire. The 
Mongol Empire is often called the largest land empire 
in all histoiy. It extended more than 4,600 miles, from 
the \'ello\v Sea of Asia to the Danube River of Europe. 

During Kublai Khan's nde, many Chinese ideas and 
inventions of the early Middle Ages reached Europe and 
the Middle East. Kublai Khan encouraged commerce 
and travel with other civilized peoples. The travels of 
Marco Polo from Venice to many Far East lands were 
made chiefly under Kublai Khan's sponsorship (see 
Polo, Marco). .Soon after the death of Kublai Khan, 
the Mongols lost control of most of their empire. The 
Chinese regained control of their own country in 1368, 
when the Ming dynasty began its 300-year rule of 
China (see Mongol Empire). 

China's contributions to civilization during the Mid- 
dle Ages came chiefly during the T'ang dynasty (618- 
906) and the Sung dynasty (960-1279). The T'ang 
period became known as the golden age of Chinese 
civilization. During this period, the Chinese invented 
printing. The world's oldest printed book is the Diamond 
Sutra, printed in China in 868 (see Book [picture]). 
Chinese arts and literature flourished during the same 
era. Lasting contributions were made by two of the 
greatest Chinese poets, Li Po and Tu Fu. Their poems, 
written in words of great beauty and simplicity, still 
inspire many poets in all parts of the world. During the 
Sung period, the Chinese invented gunpowder, the 
magnetic compass, and movable type for printing. 
Scholarly advances also were made during the T'ang 
and Sung dynasties. Chinese scholars produced impor- 
tant dictionaries, encyclopedias, and histories. 



^ yyj^ v Japan During 
^^ The Middle Ages 



Japan developed its basic civilization and rapidly 
advanced to a golden age during the Middle .'^ges. 
Little is known of Japan's early days. Buddhist monks 
and merchants brought civilized ways of life to Japan 
from China and Korea. By the a.d. 550's, many Japa- 
nese were practicing Buddhism. They also were pro- 
ducing arts and crafts similar to those of the Chinese. 
1 he Japanese took over the Chinese system of writing, 
and their scholars produced many works in Chinese 
styles. The early Japanese also adopted basic Chinese 
methods of government. Unlike the Chinese, however, 
the Japanese thought of their emperor as godlike. They 
believed an emperor must never be overthrown. The 
Japanese also developed as important parts of their cul- 
ture a belief in the superiority of soldiers, and a great 
respect for stern militaiy conduct. 



Civilization developed so rapidly in Japan that a 
golden age flourished there from the late 700's to about 
1150. During Japan's golden age, Kyoto was estab- 
lished as the nation's capital. Kyoto became one of the 
largest cities of the world during the Middle Ages. At 
the height of Japan's golden age, the emperor lost much 
of his political power to the heads of noble families. 
These noblemen, called shoguns, ruled Japan for hun- 
dreds of years. But they all ruled in the name of the 
emperor. Deep respect for the emperors of Japan and 
strict obedience to military- discipline lasted into Mod- 
ern Times. In fact, these basic elements of Japanese 
culture became strong influences on the course of his- 
tory during the early 1900's. See Japan (History). 

India During 
The Middle Ages 

India was invaded by many peoples during the Mid- 
dle Ages. As a result, little progress was made in devel- 
oping the civilization that had flourished in India 
during Ancient Times. 

The most important invaders of India were the Mos- 
lems. They pushed into the plains of northern India 
from Afghanistan and central Asia. Unlike the Mongol 
invaders of China, the Moslem invaders of India did 
not imite with the people they conquered. .Some Indians 
gave up their Hindu religion and became Moslems. 
But most Indians did not accept the Mo.slem customs 
or the Islamic religion. Largely because of their re- 
ligious differences, the people of India became cul- 
turally divided. This deep cultural division has lasted 
for hundreds of years. It became the basis for the politi- 
cal partition of India into two independent countries — 
India and Pakistan — in 1947. 



..- yy^ ^ Other Civilizations During 
^^ The Middle Ages 



Most regions of Africa, North America, and South 
America remained uncivilized during the Middle Ages. 
But these continents did have some civilized areas. 
Northern Africa, of course, had been civilized since the 
days of ancient Egypt. Some civilizations also existed on 
the west and east coasts of Africa. Similarly, only a few 
areas of North and South America were civilized. In 
parts of Central and South America, some Indian 
groups developed highly advanced civilizations. 

Africa. The Sahara separated the civilized northern 
area of Africa from the largely uncivilized African 
interior. Most Africans south of the .Sahara were Negroes 
who had primitive tribal cultiues. During the Middle 
Ages, Arab traders of northern Africa carried Moslem 
culture to western Africa. There, the Arabs estab- 
lished the state of Ghana. The Negroes of Ghana be- 
came converted to the Islamic religion. They also 
adopted many Moslem ways of life. The Negroes gradu- 
ally gained control of Ghana and built a large empire. 
During the lOOO's, the Malinke people conquered 
Ghana and expanded it into the Mali empire. The 
capital of the Mali empire, Timbuktu, became an im- 
portant African center of trade and Moslem culture. In 
southern Africa, the Zimbabwe civilization lasted from 



354 




"^a*:^ 






Chinese Printing was a well-established art hundreds of years 
before Europeans began using movable type in the mid-1 400's. 
The Chinese invented printing about 770, during the T'ang dynasty. 



about 900 to 1500. Ruins of fortresses of that Negro 
civilization still stand in southern Rhodesia. 

The Arabs also established trading settlements on the 
east coast of Africa, including Kilwa, Mombasa, and 
Zanzibar. There, Arab goods were exchanged for iron, 
ivory, and slaves from the African interior. 

The Americas. The first people who lived on the 
North and South American continents probably came 
from Asia. They were later called Indians. Most Indians 
of the Americas followed primitive ways of life. But 
during the Middle Ages, some of these tribal peoples 
developed civilized societies. Their societies reached 
about the same cultural level as the cradle civilizations 
of Ancient Times. 

An important Indian civilization was developed by 
the Mava of Central America. The Maya developed a 
calendar, a system of writing, and a system of mathe- 
matics. They built huge temples that were much like 
the pyramids of ancient Egypt. The Aztec and the 
Toltec developed civilizations in what is now Mexico, 
and the Inca built a magnificent empire in what is now 
Peru. Most of these Indian civilizations lasted until 
early Modern Times. They were destroyed by European 
conquerors. The customs and skills of the Indians were 
of little interest to the Europeans. But the Europeans 
learned about many new foods from the Indians. These 
foods included cocoa, corn, peanuts, potatoes, and 
tomatoes. See Indian, American. 



Pyramids of the Maya, built about A.D. 1000, are relics of an early civilization of 

the Americas. El Castillo, 75 feet tall, is at Chichen Itza, in Yucatan. 

Lh^ii'lotU- s.iikowskl 




■* 

^ 



/k 






"** 



MueeuTi of Fine Arts, Boston 

Japanese Pafnttng reached a high stage of development dur- 
ing the Kamakura period (1185-1 333), when artists recorded the 
deeds of the samurai, o warrior class that controlled feudol Jopon. 




Fouir Alt Museum 

Indian Temples built during the 700's were covered with sculp- 
tured religious figures. The famous Shore Temple, carved out of 
granite, stands on the Indian Ocean coast, 30 miles from Modras. 





Aztec Images of gods or goddesses were 
decorated with rough carvings of religious 
symbols. This massive stone stotue of the 
goddess Cootlicoe is over 8 feet tall. 



355 




WORLD HISTORY 



Modern Times 

Early Period: 1453-1900 



Mankind made giant cultural strides during an era that many historians 
call the early period of Modern Times. They generally date this period from 
the collapse of the Byzantine Empire in 1453 through the 1800"s. It was an 
era of scientific achievement, industrial revolution, and sweeping political 
and social change. 

The people of Western Europe made almost all the important cultural 
advances during the new era. Little progress was made in the Middle East, 
India, or China. As a result, these ancient centers of civilization came 
largely under the control or influence of Western civilization. 

The power of the Western European nations rose on a strong tide of 
scientific achievements. Some of these achievements made possible long 
sailing trips and voyages of discovery. Others increased food production and 
revolutionized manufacturing methods. The European nations sent ex- 
plorers and militaiT forces throughout the world. They sought markets for 
European products and raw materials for European industries. 

British, French, Portuguese, and Spanish colonies were established in the 
newly discovered lands of the North and South American continents. 
Thousands of Europeans migrated to these lands, and brought the customs 
and ideas of Western civilization. Many colonists of the Americas also 
wanted to develop certain new ideas that were sweeping Europe — democ- 
racy, nationalism, and religious toleration. 

By the early 1800's, most of the colonists of North and South America 
had freed themselves from European rule. But European nations still gov- 
erned large colonial empires in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East. European 
rule of these regions did not meet serious challenge until the 1900's. 



The Clock Tower of the Houses of Parliament, London 



The Huntington I.lhrarj- 



An Exploration Map of the Carib- 
bean region appears in an atlas pub- 
lished in 1 547. It is fairly accurate, but 
by today's map-making methods, the 
map shows the region upside down. 




356 



The Renaissance 



The great advance of Western civilization during 
Modern Times started during a 300-year period of cul- 
tural awakening called the Renaissance. The Renais- 
sance actually began in the early 1300's in Italy. There, 
artists and scholars supported the idea of individual 
freedom. They urged people to cast off the ancient 
customs and rules that governed life during the Middle 
Ages. The basic Renaissance idea of individual freedom 
became a cultural force that spread throughout most of 
northern Europe. 

Important cultural achievements resulted from the 
spirit and vigor of the Renaissance idea. Many world 
masterpieces of architecture, literature, painting, and 
sculpture were created. Famous Renaissance artists and 
writers included Cei-vantes, Hans Holbein, Leonardo 
da \'inci, Michelangelo, Raphael, and William .Shake- 
speare. Revolutionaiy discoveries in astronomy and 
physics were made by Nicolaus Copernicus and Galileo. 
Other Renaissance scholars, including Desiderius Eras- 
mus and Saint Thomas More, developed a humanist 
philosophy. This philosophy stressed the importance of 
man and his enjoyment of life. It influenced many 
political and social movements of Modern Times. The 
humanist philosophy also inspired a strong religious 
movement called the Reformation. The Reformation 
led to the establishment of Protestant churches in 
England, Germany, and many other countries. See 
Humanism; Reformation. 

Exploration and commerce expanded rapidly during 
the Renaissance. The spirit of the times called for en- 
joyment of the good things of life — tasty foods, elegant 
clothes, and elaborate homes. Merchants were en- 











'^f^a^.l 



'- Thf Picii»r,iit Moifian IJhrarj- 

! 

! Telescopes Used by Galileo to make revolutionary discov- 
eries in astronomy ore displayed in a museum in Florence, Italy. 
Galileo's chart of the solar system was published in 1 632. He has 
been called the father of modern experimental science. 




European nations and their colonies in the late 1 800's (black). 



MAJOR EVENTS OF MODERN TIMES^ 
EARLY PERIOD: 1453-1900 



1492 Christopher Columbus reached Americo and claimed it 

for Spain. 
1492 The Spaniards captured Granada and ended the rule of 

Spain by the Moslem Moors. 
1517 The Reformation began in Germany. 
1519-1522 Ferdinand Magellan commanded the first voyage 

around the world. 
1526 Babar, a Moslem ruler, conquered India and established 

the Mogul Empire. 
1532 Francisco Pizarro invaded Peru, beginning the Spanish 

conquest of the Inca Empire. 
1588 The Royal Navy of England defeated the Spanish 

Armada and established England as a great naval 

power. 
1613 Michael Romanov became Czar of Russia and started 

the 300-year rule of Russia by the Romanovs. 
1644 Monchus conquered China and established their rule 

that lasted until 1912. 
1688 The "Glorious Revolution" deposed James II of England. 
1763 The Treaty of Paris ended the Seven Years' War in 

Europe, and the French and Indian War in America. 
1776 The 1 3 American colonies of England signed the Declara- 
tion of Independence. 
1789 The French Revolution began. 
1815 Napoleon Bonaparte was defeated at the Battle of 

Waterloo, ending his ambition to rule Europe. 
1824 Armies of Simon Bolivar and Antonio Jose de Sucre de- 
feated the Spaniards at Ayacucho, ending the latin- 
American wars of independence. 
1842 The Treaty of Nanking ended the "Opium War" and 

granted important trading rights in China to Great 

Britain. 
1847 Liberia was established as the first independent Negro 

republic of Africa. 
1853-1854 Commodore Matthew Perry visited Japan and 

opened two ports to U.S. trade, ending Japan's isolation. 
1858 Great Britain took over rule of India from the East Indlo 

Company after the Sepoy Rebellion. 
1865 Union forces defeated the Confederates in the American 

Civil War offer four years of fighting. 
1867 Emperor Mutsuhito regained his traditional power from 

the shogun and established Japan's capital in Tokyo. 
1867 The British North America Act established the Dominion 

of Canada. 
1869 The Suez Canal opened. 
1871 Germany became united under the Prussian king, who 

ruled the new empire as Kaiser Withelm 1. 
1882 Great Britain invaded and occupied Egypt. 
1885 Leopold II of Belgium established the Congo Free State 

and controlled it as his personal possession. 

1895 Japan took control of Formosa after the Chinese- 
Japanese War. 

1 898 The United States took control of Guam, Puerto Rico, and 
the Philippines following the Spanish-American War. 



357 



WORLD, HISTORY OF 

couraged to bring fine goods of all kinds from distant 
lands to European markets. 

To meet the demands of the merchants, adventurous 
explorers competed to find the best trade routes^ to the 
Far East. Historic voyages were made by Pedro Alvares 
Cabral, Christopher Columbus, Vasco da Gama, Bartol- 
omeu Dias, Ferdinand Magellan, and others. They 
opened new sea routes for traders who wanted to 
avoid the difficult land routes across the Middle East 
and Asia. An important sea route to Asia was estab- 
lished by way of the Cape of Good Hope. Other sea 
routes led to the Americas. See Exploration and Dis- 
covery (The Great Age of Discovery). 

As goods poured into Europe from distant lands, a 
commercial revolution developed. Gold and silver im- 
ports created a new kind of wealth. Investment oppor- 
tunities \vere provided by the creation of joint-stock 
companies. These companies got money to do business by 
selling shares of stock to a number of individuals. They 
foiTned the basis of the corporations of today. The first 
stock exchanges were also established. 

European standards of living rose with the growth of 
commerce and the use of goods from other countries. 
European markets were supplied with luxurious chintz 
fabrics, porcelains, rugs, and silks. Foods from distant 
lands included bananas, cocoa, coffee, lemons, oranges, 
and tea. In the same period, a slave trade developed 
with Africa. 

The expansion of overseas commerce led to the estab- 
lishment of European colonies in many countries. Some 
of the colonies, chiefly those in tropical coimtries, were 
established almost entirely as trading centers. They 
served as temporaiy outposts where European manu- 
factured goods were exchanged for raw materials. Many 
other colonies became permanent. They included the 
English colony of Virginia, the French colony of Que- 
bec, and the Spanish colonies of New Spain (Mexico) 
and Peru. These colonies in North and South America 
formed a pattern for European colonization of many 
other lands in the years to come. 



Life during the Renaissance, and the many cultural 
achievements of this period of histoiy, are described in 
the article Renaissance. 



^^^^ The Age of Reason 



During the 1600's and 1700's, an intellectual revolu- 
tion swept over Western Europe. Traditional principles 
that had served scholars for hundreds of years were dis- 
carded. The leading thinkers of the era insisted that 
reason was the sole test of truth. The period became 
known as the Age of Reason. 

The most important contribution of the Age of 
Reason was probably the development of the modern 
scientific method. Scientists now applied the reasoning 
process to their studies of basic natural laws. They or- 
ganized general rules for reaching scientific conclusions 
that are still followed today (see Science [How Scien- 
tists Work]). 

One of the steps of the scientific method was careful 
experimentation. To cany out such experimentation, 
scholars needed precise instruments. Their needs were 
met by inventors of the era. Many important instru- 
ments were developed, including the microscope, sex- 
tant, slide rule, chronometer, air pump, and adding 
machine. 

With important new instruments to aid them, scien- 
tists advanced rapidly. The discoveries of Sir Isaac 
Newton revolutionized astronomy. Benjamin Franklin 
and Alessandro V'olta discovered the nature of elec- 
tricity. Robert Boyle, Antoine Lavoisier, and Joseph 
Priestley foimded modern chemistry. Rene Descartes 
invented analytic geometry'. William Harvey discovered 
how blood circulates in the human body. 

The scientific method was so Successful in solving 
problems of nature that some philosophers applied its 
principles to human problems. A group of French schol- 
ars used the tests of reason in dealing with problems ot 
economics, education, government, and religion. The 
French scholars, known as the philosophes, attacked 
many evils of the times. These evils included religious 



The Study of Human Anptomy opened the way to important medical discoveries in Europe 
during the 1 600's. Rembrandt portrayed this study in his famous painting The Anatomy tesson. 



Magellan's Ship, Victoria, was the 
first to circle the earth. 




intolerance, superstition, tyranny, unjust laws, and the 
slave trade. The most famous member of the French 
group was probably Voltaire. Others included Montes- 
quieu, Denis Diderot, and Jean Jacques Rousseau. 
Their writings not only attacked evils, but also ex- 
pressed a basic faith. That faith symbolized the spirit of 
the era — belief in mankind's ability to solve problems, 
with reason as the most important tool. 

The Age of Reason was also a period of achievement 
in the arts. The forni of the modern novel was developed 
by Heniy Fielding. The poem took on new brilliance in 
famous couplets written by Alexander Pope. Great 
painters of the era included Thomas Gainsborough, 
Francisco Goya, William Hogarth, Rembrandt, Sir 
Joshua Reynolds, and Antoine Watteau. Many modern 
forms of music, such as the concerto, opera, symphony, 
and oratorio, were developed. Outstanding composers 
of the period included Johann Sebastian Bach, George 
Frideric Handel, Joseph Haydn, and Wolfgang Ama- 
deus Mozart. 



^P Democracy and Nationalism 



Two powerful political forces — democracy and na- 
tionalism — took shape during the 1600's and 1 700"s. 
Democracy developed from revolutions that established 
the right of people to govern themselves. Such revolu- 
tions ended despotism (absolute control by a ruler) in 
England, America, and France. Nationalism developed 
from the strong feelings of national pride that united the 
people of each countiy as they fought for their demo- 
cratic ideals. 

The English Revolution of the 1600's was the first 
important attack in Modern Times on the absolute 
power of kings. The attack was stimulated by the demo- 
cratic ideas that developed during the Age of Reason. 
The English revolution actually was a series of strug- 
gles. At one time, the fight was led by the Puritans, a 
religious group with strong democratic principles. A 
republic called a commonwealth was established in 
England in 1649. As a republic, England came under 



Plays of William Shakespeare were often staged in the court- 
yards of English inns during the late I 500's and early 1600's. 





Qtninii r^it tnot (jqnrtr 
niwfnitiifon&amp;lajiww 
Hyauanr.omtto. ^ 

^uuciitte itinouafiiuit 

^utnfittsioittuuuitir 

VpifilirQiun(imt.utonf 

(ToiOTiiHliirfiimr 



M;ti9 rt^:!.iifiiuaHrur 

^L'ijiuifttnijniM 

Till ir;itiii§Jiar({Iim»a 
rai/aiiii«,«i(!muj)ii««r 



m* 



German Consulate General 

Page of a Prayer Book of 

the 1 400's, found in France. 




Bettmann Arrhlve 

Utopia, a mythical country, was 
described by St. Thomas More. 



A Bakery, shown m a French 
encyclopedia of the 1 700's, 

N«-w York Piihllc Library 




WORLD, HISTORY OF 

the rule of Oliver Cromwell, a Puritan leader. Cromwell 
niled as a dictator. The monarchy was restored in 1 660. 
But the English people continued to fight for a strong 
voice in their government. In 1688, James II was de- 
posed during the "Glorious Revolution," and William 
and Mary took the throne. The English revolutionary 
movement ended in 1689. That year, Parliament 
adopted the Bill of Rights, assuring the basic rights of 
the English people. 

The Bill of Rights took away most powers of the 
English monarch and guaranteed the liberty of the 
English people. The document became an important 
rallying point of English nationalism. The Bill of Rights 
provided legal grounds for people to revolt against a bad 
government. This idea spread to many other countries, 
chiefly through the works of John Locke. Locke, a 
political scholar, was probably the most influential 
writer of early Modern Times. See Locke, John. 

The American Revolution was based chiefly on the 
right of people to revolt. This right had been established 
during the English revolution. The American colonists 
restated it in the Declaration of Independence of July 
4, 1 776. The Declaration was written by a committee 
headed by Thomas Jefferson. The committee borrowed 
from the works of Locke and other political writers, but 
the language of the Declaration had a special force. 
Phrases such as "all men are created equal" made the 
Declaration of Independence one of the most important 
documents in the history of human liberty. See United 
States, History of (Declaring Independence). 

British rule in the colonies ended, and a new na- 
tion — the L'nited States of America — was formed dur- 
ing the Revolutionaiy War (1775-1783). The new na- 
tion's first system of government, established by the 
Articles of Confederation, proved unsatisfactory. A new 
system of government under the L'nited States Consti- 
tution was set up in 1789. 

The Constitution established the United States as a 
republic. The Constitution also framed a system of 
federalism that divided power between the national and 
state governments. In 1791, the first 10 amendments to 
the Constitution came into force. These amendments, 
known as the Bill of Rights, state the basic rights of all 
citizens. The United States Constitution became a 
model for the constitutions of many other countries, in- 
cluding most of the Latin-American republics. 

During the American revolution and the eaily years 
of the republic, strong feelings of democracy developed 
in the United States. Since then, democracy has become 
the chief rallying point of American nationalism. Many 
events of today are influenced by America's support of 
democracy throughout the world. 

The French Revolution (1 789-1 799) was a great polit- 
ical and social upheaval, marked by disorder and vio- 
lence. During the First French Republic (1792-1799), 
most symbols of despotism or privilege in France were 
wiped out. Titles of nobility were eliminated, and 
"citizen" became the only French title. The French 
revolutionists issued a great document of democratic 
principles— the Declaration of the Rights of Man (see 
Rights of Man, Declaration of the). 

The French revolutionary struggle was climaxed by 
a reign of terror imder the rule of radical leaders such as 

360 



Georges Jacques Danton and Maximilien Robespierre. 
The guillotine, a beheading instrument, became a sym- 
bol of the French revolution. Thousands of aristocrats, 
and many citizens who opposed the radicals, were 
guillotined. During this period, the French armies won 
many victories against foreign enemies of revolutionai'y 
France. In 1 794, the period of terror ended. Soon after, 
the nation came under the stern rule of Napoleon Bona- 
parte, the great French military genius. The stirring 
events of the 10-year French revolutionai'y struggle are 
described in the article French Revolution. 

Napoleon led France to victoiy after victory until, 
in 1812, the French controlled most of Western Europe 
(see Napoleon I). The French soldiers fought to defend 
and spread the democratic principles in which they be- 
lieved. Their battle cry of "liberty, equality, and fra- 
ternity" stirred the democratic and nationalistic feelings 
of many peoples. Almost all the European monarchs 
lost most of their powers in revolutionary movements 
that swept over much of Eiuope. 

Democratic Reforms and New Nations appeared in 
Europe after Napoleon was defeated in the Battle of 
Waterloo in 1815. At the Congress of Vienna (1814- 
1815), Austria, Great Britain, Prussia, and Russia re- 
made the map of Europe (see Vienna, Congress of). 
For political reasons, the great powers tried to smother 
the democratic and nationalistic forces that were sweep- 
ing over Europe. To hold back democracy, they re- 
stored the former monarchies of France, Holland, Spain, 
and the Italian states. In some areas, to stop nation- 
alism, the great powers joined people of different na- 
tionalities under a single ruler. For example, they put 
the Belgians under the rule of the Dutch king. They 
agreed to let the Swedish king rule the Norwegians. 
Most of these efforts failed. Democratic movements suc- 
ceeded in many countries. During the 1830's, Belgium 
broke away from the Dutch. In 1875, France estab- 
lished a lasting republican government. By the 1880's, 
many nations of Western Europe had constitutions and 
some democratic institutions. At the same time, strongly 
nationalistic people had unified many small states and 
formed new nations, such as Austria-Hungary, Ger- 
many, and Italy. 

Colonial wars of independence created new nations 
in Latin America. The colonists were inspired by the 
principles of democracy and nationalism that had 
developed in Europe and the United States. By 1824, 
most of the Latin-American countries had been freed 
from European rule. New, independent nations in- 
cluded Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, 
Ecuador, Peru, and Venezuela. See Latin America 
(Struggle for Independence). 

The Industrial Revolution 

During the late 1700's and the 1800's, an industrial 
revolution changed much of Western civilization. Ma- 
chines replaced many hand tools that civilized man had 
used for thousands of years. With the new machines, 
vast quantities of goods could be produced rapidly. 
Never before had mankind been able to make such 
great use of the world's natural resources. 

The chief ingredients of the industrial revolution were 
manufacturing machines. The story of their invention, 




The English Revolution of 

the 1 600'5 was the first impor- 
tant attock in Modem Times on 
the absolute power of kings. 
Charles I walked to his execu- 
tion in 1 649 during a Puritan re- 
bellion led by Oliver Cromwell. 



Htslorlc.Tl Plf-Hjn-fi Scrvlre 



i 



The American Revolution 

created the nation that became 
the leader of the Free World. 
The Battle of Concord was the 
second clash between the Ameri- 
cans ond the British in the Revo- 
lutionary War. The U.S. Consti- 
tution became the model of the 
constitutions of many nations. 



I Packec, j*/ /&gt;-•/?/ 



WE, tht Peopk "f Ac Uniioi Sciro. in onkr 
) iiK&gt;tCKTfc.-J[Tnim.rQi&gt;Ii)'i(h)un;cv,infatc. 
Tr«miiihtv. ptmiik fijt tlif (.•roninn DeltntT. pro- 
mole the C«.otI WilCfi, WJ ft^-u.e fhe fllcJlmg. of 
lAoty &lt;o Ouifclrci jud OUT Pifteniy. do orduD ir.cj cflalililh tlui 
OafUtUOon for ihc I'mTctlSiJia of Anxnu. 






tK^ 



Historical Society of Pennsylvania 



The French Revolution be- 
gan on July 14, 1789, with an 
attack on the Bastille. This fa- 
mous prison in Paris symbolized 
the hated government of King 
Louis XVI. 




Now York PubUo Llhrttr&gt;' 



WORLD, HISTORY OF 

development, and economic significance is told in the 
article Industrial Revolution. 

Industrialism changed the lives of millions of people. 
When the era began, most families lived in farm areas. 
Towns and villages sei"ved chiefly as market centers for 
the farmers. As industry developed, factories were built 
in many towns. These towns grew rapidly into indus- 
trial cities. People streamed into the cities to take jobs 
tending the machines in the factories. Railroads and 
watenvays were built to link many cities. They also 
provided transportation between the cities and the 
farmlands, forests, and mines. The invention of the tele- 
graph furnished instant communication between distant 
places. 

The growth of industrialism brought social changes 
of great importance. A middle class of people appeared. 
The members of the middle class were neither nobles 
nor peasants. Most of them were businessmen and 
wealthy landowners. The middle class grew in size and 
influence. It owned most of the factories, hired the 
workers, and operated the banks, mines, railroads, and 
shops. Most members of the middle class believed that 
business should be regulated by supply and demand, 
without government controls. This idea formed the 
basis of the economic system known as capitalism. The 
principles of capitalism were set forth by the Scotch 
economist Adam .Smith. See Capitalism; Smith, Adam. 

The rapid growth of industrialism produced many 
problems. Most factory workers were poorly paid and 
suffered great hardships. They were not permitted to 
form labor unions, and their working conditions were 
not regulated by law. The situation led to widespread 
attacks against the evils of the capitalist system. Social- 
ism became the chief rallying point for many persons 
who opposed the capitalist system. The socialists 
wanted to put all industrial production under the con- 
trol of governments. From that basic principle, Karl 
Marx, a German writer and social philosopher, devel- 
oped the theories of communism. Marx called for the 
workers to revolt against the middle class and set up 
state-owned economic systems. 

Many reforms supported by members of various social 
movements were adopted generally during the 1800's. 
In several countries, workers won the right to form 
labor unions. Laws regulating working conditions in 
factories were passed in Great Britain and the United 
States during the 1830's. Later, many other countries 
also passed laws that improved the conditions of indus- 
trial workers. Great Britain and Germany pioneered in 
social legislation that provided accident, sickness, and 
unemployment insurance for industrial employees. 

By the late 1800"s, most industrial nations had laws 
that regulated working conditions and also raised the 
people's standards of living. But the followers of Marx 
continued to call for a class war and for the violent over- 
throw of capitalism. The Marxist movement developed 
into communism in Russia in the early 1900"s. 

Imperialism. The industrial nations needed large 
supplies of raw materials for their factories. The vast 
continents of Africa and Asia had these materials in 
abundance. Africa and Asia also had millions of people 
who still used ancient tools of production. These two 
continents provided good markets for the wide variety 

360b 



of manufactured goods being produced in the industrial 
nations of Europe. 

The Eiuopean nations established many colonies 
in Africa and Asia during the 1800's. They did so 
(1) to insure a flow of raw materials, and (2) to con- 
trol large markets. European colonial rule extended 
over most of Africa. Great Britain and France were 
the leading colonial powers of that continent. Nearly 
a third of Asia came under the colonial rule of Great 
Britain, France, The Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain. 
China had closed most of its ports to Europeans. But 
they were opened in 1842 after Britain defeated China 
in the Opium War (see Chin A [The "Unequal Treaties"]). 

By the late 1800's, huge European empires had 
spread over most of the world. The largest empires were 
those of Great Britain, France, and Germany. Impor- 
tant colonies also were established by Belgium, The 
Netherlands, and Portugal. This colonial expansion be- 
came known as imperialism. The United States acted to 
protect the independent countries of Latin America 
from European colonial expansion. The protective 
policy of the L'nited States was set forth in the Monroe 
Doctrine in 1823. However, the influence of the United 
States over Latin America was often called imperialism 
too. See Imperialism; Monroe Doctrine. 

The Close of an Era 

Industrialism and imperialism climaxed an era of 
Modern Times that is often called Europe's "wonderful 
centuiy." Most European nations had become eco- 
nomically wealthy and militarily strong. They ruled 
vast regions of the world through powerful colonial 
systems. 'Fheir arts, sciences, and scholarship reached 
high levels of development. The European way of life 
during the 1800's formed the most advanced civilization 
the world had ever known. The United States, Canada, 
and some other coimtries of the Western Hemisphere 
were rapidly developing along the European pattern. 
In contrast, most nations of Africa and Asia remained 
primitive or at the levels of civilization they had reached 
during the Middle Ages. 



The Opium War with China helped the victorious British to ex- 
pand their colonial empire in the Orient during the mid- 1800's. 

HistoriCTl Pictures Service 




vl^ ^^^^ 




Bvttmann Archh 



Smoking Fotfory Chimneys throughout Europe signaled the 
start of the Industrial Revolution during the mid-1700's. The rise of 
industrialism reshaped Western civilization and chonged the 
lives of millions of persons in all ports of the world. 



The superior position of the chief European nations 
met with little challenge during the 1800's. As a result, 
certain attitudes shaped the basic philosophy of the 
era. These were: 

1 . The belief that it was right for millions of colonial 
peoples to be ruled by European nations. 

2. Acceptance of nationalism as the chief political 
principle of the major European nations. 

3. Faith in democracy as a political system that 
would someday be adopted throughout the world. 

4. The certainty that capitalism, although subject to 
reforms, would develop as the only important economic 
system. 

5. Hopefulness based on the idea that science was a 
complete blessing to mankind, and that man's progress 
depended almost entirely on scientific developments. 

These were the chief attitudes of Western civilization 
as a great era of history drew to a close during the early 
years of the 1900"s. All were soon to change. 




The Telephone wos invented In 1876, and hastened 
industrial development. Its inventor, Alexander Graham 
Bell, opened a New York City to Chicago line in I 892. 



Historical Pictures Scn-fce 



European Wealth and power 

were reflected in the elegance 
of society life during the late 
1 800's, when the nations of Eu- 
rope ruled most of the world. 





WORLD HISTORY 




Modern Times 

The 1900's 



The first half of the 1900's was a period of great change — perhaps the 
most rapid and widespread change in all history. Most of the attitudes of 
the previous era were shattered. The costliest and most destructive wars in 
history were fought. Political and social upheavals overturned many long- 
established governments. At the same time, science made giant advances. 
Revolutionaiy technological inventions altered basic ways of life and 
thrust mankind into the Space Age. 

The 1900's opened with most of the world imder the rule of European 
nations. But by the 1960's, the huge European empires had collapsed. 
Colonialism was a thing of the past. In Africa alone, more than 30 new na- 
tions established their independence. Traditional European nationalism 
lost much of its force. By the 1960's, most European countries were tiying 
to solve important problems cooperatively. They were members of organi- 
zations set up for their joint defense or for pooling their economic re- 
sources. On the other hand, nationalism exploded with full force in 
Africa and Asia. It became the chief moving spirit of the newly in- 
dependent nations. 

The 1900's dawned with the idea that democracy and capitalism would 
spread throughoiU the world. By the 1960's, that idea had proved false. 
More than a billion persons were living under communism. 

In 1900, it was generally assumed that mankind would use scientific 
achievements only to build better ways of life. But in 1945, the invention 
of the atomic bomb demonstrated that man could also use science to 
produce tremendous destructive power. 

By the 1960's. the people of an industrialized country hardly realized 
how much life had changed in 50 years. They took for granted airplanes, 
atomic energy, automation, radio, refrigerators, color motion pictures, tele- 



BlotloFf at Cape Kennedy 




36od 



vision, synthetic materials, and superhighways crowded 
with automobiles. None of these things had even existed 
in 1900. 

The Space Age opened in 1 957 when Russia launched 
the first artificial satellite to circle the earth. During the 
next few years, U.S. and Russian rockets sent many 
scientific instruments into space. Soon afterward, astro- 
nauts of the two coimtries traveled around the earth in 
spaceships. By the mid-1960's, American and Russian 
scientists had solved many problems of extended space 
travel. The world was wondering how soon astronauts 
would land on the moon. See Space Travel. 

In the 1960"s, people were also accustomed to great 
achievements from medical science. During the first 
half of the century, many traditional methods of diag- 
nosing, treating, and preventing disease had been revo- 
lutionized. The new methods were aided by drugs that 
previously had been unknown. The new drugs included 
antibiotics, sulfonamides, and certain serums and 
vaccines (see Drug). Rapid medical progress was chiefly 
responsible for healthier and longer lives in many parts 
of the world. In 1900, a baby born in the United States 
had a life expectancy of 47.3 years. By 1965, this figure 
had increased to 71 years. 



0^0 World Wars I and II 



War — fought on a greater scale than ever before — 
overshadowed world developments during the earlv 
1900's. World War I raged from 1914 to 1918, and 
World War II from 1939 to 1945. 



wide World 




The Tragedy of a World War was 

mirrored in the faces of the French peo- 
ple watching German troops march in- 
to Paris in 1940. The French govern- 
ment surrendered after France's armies 
were defeated early in World War II. 




Noncommunist countries (brown), communist countries (black) in 
the mid- 1960'$. 



MAJOR EVENTS OF THE 1900*S 



1901 The Australian states united to form a commonwealth. 

1905 Japan defected Russia in the Russo-Japanese War. 

1912 The Republic of China was established. 

1914 The assassination of Archduke Francis Ferdinand of 
Austria-Hungary started World War I. 

1917 Revolutionists overthrew Czar Nicholas II and the Bol- 
sheviks seized power in Russia. 

1920 The Panama Canal opened. 

1920 The Leogue of Notions was established. 

1922 The Fascist party seized control of Italy and Benito 
Mussolini became dictator. 

1922 The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was established. 

1923 Mustafa Kemol (Atatijrk) established the Republic of 
Turkey and modernized Turkish institutions. 

1933 Adolf Hitler became dictator of Germany, 
1935-1936 Italian troops Invaded and annexed Ethiopia. 
1939 Francisco Franco became dictator of Spain after 32 

months of civil war. 
1939 Germany invaded Poland, storting World War II. 
1941 The Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor, and the United 

States entered World War 11. 

1945 The United Nations was established. 

1 945 The first atomic bombs used In warfare were dropped by 
U.S. planes on Hiroshima and Nogosoki. 

1945 World War 11 ended in Europe on May 8 ond In the 
Pacific on September 2. 

1946 The United States granted independence to the Philip- 
pines. 

1947 Great Britain granted Independence to India and 
Pakistan. 

1948 The United States established the European Recovery 
Program (Marshall Plan) to aid Europe's economic 
recovery. 

1949 The North Atlantic Treaty Orgonlzotlon (NATO) formed 
by the United States, Canada, and 10 European notions. 

1949 The Chinese Communists completed their conquest of 
China. 

1950 North Korean communist troops Invaded South Korea, 
starting the Korean War. 

1957 Russia opened the Space Age by launching Sputnik I, the 
first artificial satellite to circle the earth. 

1959 Communist guerrilla forces of North Vietnam began a 
compaign of terror against U.S.-supported South Viet- 
nam. 

1962 Russia agreed to U.S. demands that missiles be removed 
from Cuba, ending a serious Cold War crisis. 

1963 Russia, the United States, and Great Britain signed an 
agreement banning the testing of nuclear weapons 
above ground. Other nations signed later. 

1965 Indonesia became the first country to resign from the 
United Notions. 



36oe 



WORLD, HISTORY OF 

In World War I, for the first time in histoiy. man- 
kind came to know total war. Entire populations of the 
fighting nations worked in the war effort. Millions of 
men, women, and children were killed. Whole cities 
were destroyed. The fighting forces clashed on vast 
battlefields— on land, in the air, on the sea. and under 
the sea. The weapons of total war included bombs and 
missiles of tremendous destructive power. During World 
War II, the atomic bomb was developed. Its devel- 
opment led to a bomb a thousand times more pow- 
erful — the hydrogen bomb. Thus, mankind's most 
terrible war helped produce a weapon that could wipe 
out entire civilizations if used in another total war. The 
many phases of the two world wars are described in the 
articles World War I and World War II. 

Out of the horror of each world war came an attempt 
by mankind to prevent war forever. The first attempt 
was made after World War I with the creation of the 
League of Nations (see League of Nations). But the 
League failed to settle many post war problems. It also 
was powerless to prevent a rising tide of aggression by 
Japan, Italy, and Geimany during the 1930"s. The 
second attempt was made toward the end of World War 
II with the establishment of the United Nations. .Since 
1945, the UN has worked for international peace and 
security in two chief ways. First, the UN has provided a 
meeting place where nations can discuss their quarrels 
peaceably. Second, the UN has conducted worldwide 
programs to help nations solve problems of health, food 
shortages, and social injustice. The structure, opera- 
tions, and accomplishments of the UN are described in 
the article United Nations. 

The L'N has carried on its peace-keeping tasks in an 
atmosphere of great tension and unrest. The most im- 
portant results of World War II were the shift of world 
power to the United States and Russia, and the col- 
lapse of European empires. The shift of power to these 
two nations produced a bitter struggle that has divided 
most of the world. The United States and Russia be- 
came the leaders of two competing systems of govern- 
ment — democracy and communism. The collapse of 
colonial empires brought about the rise of many new 
nations in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East. These new 
nations have had many great political, economic, and 
social problems. 

The Rise of New Nations 

One by one, the vast European empires collapsed 
after World War II. Great Britain, France, Belgium, 
The Netherlands, and the other large colonial powers 
had been weakened by their losses during the war. They 
no longer could hold their colonies by force. Further- 
more, many Emopeans had come to believe that it was 
morally wrong to rule other people against their will. 

The most striking and rapid independence move- 
ment took place in Africa. In 1950, there were only four 
independent cotmtries on the vast African continent. 
By mid-1965, Africa had 37 independent cotmtries. In 
Asia, inde|3endent governments were established after 
World War II in Burma, Cambodia, Ceylon, India, 
Indonesia, Korea, Laos, Malaysia, Pakistan, and Viet- 

36of 



nam. The Philippines were granted independence by 
the United States. In the Middle East, the nations that 
became independent after World War II included 
Cyprus, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, and Syria. 

Most of the newly independent nations had been un- 
der the rule of colonial powers for many years, or even 
for centuries. In some cases, a colony's land and other 
natural resources were developed almost entirely for the 
benefit of the colonial power. Generally, the colonial 
power gave the people little training in self-government. 
On the other hand, imperialism brought certain benefits 
to many colonial peoples. In some lands, tribal wars and 
certain imcivilized customs were stopped. In many 
colonies, the ruling powers established modern edu- 
cational systems and public health services. In several 
countries, particularly in India and the Philippines, 
democratic methods of government were introduced. 
During the course of their economic development, most 
of the colonies were equipped with modern communica- 
tion and transportation systems. 

The new nations faced many problems as a result of 
years of imperialism. But they had been brought in 
contact with the chief elements of Western progress — 
education, advanced technology and medicine, and 
new agricultural and industrial methods. 



The Rise of Communism 



^ 



The challenge of commimism has shaped much of 
histoiy during the 1900"s. Communism's goal is to re- 
place all governments with communist dictatorships. 
The commimist movement exploded with full force just 
after World War II ended in 1945. Ever since, the demo- 
cratic nations of the world, led by the United .States, 
have fought the spread of communism. By the 1960's, 
however, communist dictatorships had been established 
in Eastern Europe and the Balkans. Communist gov- 
ernments also ruled China — the largest country of Asia 
— and several other Asian nations. 

The great struggle between communism and democ- 
racy is called the Cold War. The chief weapons of the 
Cold War are the power of ideas; and economic, mili- 
tary, political, and technological power. Using these 
weapons, each side tries to demonstrate its superiority. 
Each side also uses these weapons in competing for the 
support of certain nations that have remained neutral 
in the struggle. These unaligned or uncommitted nations 
include most of the new countries of Africa and Asia. 
Many neutral nations have accepted economic and 
military aid from both sides. 

The United Nations has been a battleground of the 
Cold War almost continuously. The United States de- 
pends on the UN to settle most Cold War disputes. But 
Russia tries to weaken the authority of the UN. 

The most important demonstration of Cold War atti- 
tudes on the UN came in 1950, when the UN acted to 
stop communist North Korea from invading South 
Korea. The Korean War (1950-1953) was the first war 
in which troops of a world organization acted as "po- 
lice" to fight an aggressor nation. In the Korean War, 
strong military imits of the United States and many 
other democratic nations formed the UN army. How- 
ever, Russia declared that the UN had no right to act 
at all. Russia aided the North Koreans with war sup- 




plies. Communist China sent large forces to fight on the 
side of North Korea. See Korean W.\r. 

Several incidents of the Cold War became so serious 
that they could have touched off another world war. 
Serious incidents occur from time to time in Berlin, 
where the communists built a wall between the two sec- 
tions of the city. West Berlin is a stronghold of democ- 
racy, and East Berlin is the capital of communist- 
controlled East Gennany. Probably the most serious 
Cold War incident was the Cuban crisis of 1962. The 
United States revealed that Russia had installed mis- 
siles in Cuba that could launch atomic attacks on U.S. 
cities. The crisis passed after Russia removed the mis- 
siles. See Berlin; Cub.\ (The Cuban Crisis). 

In spite of several more tense incidents, the Cold War 
seemed to ease during the late 1950"s and early 1960's. 
Russian leaders talked much of "peaceful coexistence." 
In 1963, Great Britain, Russia, and the United States 
signed a treaty banning all nuclear testing except under- 
ground tests. Many other coimtries that did not have 
atomic weapons at the time signed the treaty later. 

The story of the worldwide struggle between democ- 
racy and communism is told in the articles Cold \V.\r 
and Communism. 



Angry Germans rebelled against 
Russian rule of East Berlin on June 17, 
1 953. Unarmed Germans fought a los- 
ing battle against the tanks used by the 
Russians to put down the uprising. 



UN Forces prevented a com- 
munist take-over of South Ko- 
rea by North Korea. The Korean 
War (1950-1953) was the 
first war fought by a world or- 
ganization to stop oggression. 





WORLD HISTORY 



, The World 
I Today 



We live in the most highly developed civilization of 
all history. At the same time, we face many problems so 
serious that they could destroy the world as we know 
it. But there is also hope. Never before has mankind 
reached our high level of technological power and scien- 
tific knowledge. For this reason, we probably have a 
greater chance of solving the problems of our times than 
any previous generation. 

The most important problem of the times is how to 
prevent another world war. The bitter struggle between 
democracy and communism that started after World 
War II still continues on a worldwide scale. But a new 
trend seems to be developing in the Cold War, with 
Communist China as its moving force. 

Communist China — the giant of Asia — has become a 
dangerous storm center of international politics. China 
has challenged Russia for the leadership of the com- 
munist nations. The Chinese communists declare that 
the commimist nations will someday go to war against 
the democracies. The Chinese accuse Russia of deserting 
basic communist aims by signing the nuclear test ban 
treaty. Russia, in turn, accuses the Chinese communists 
of misrepresenting the basic communist aims. Albania, 
a former Russian satellite, supports China, and Russia's 
grip on other communist nations may be weakening. 
Most of the satellite nations of Eastern Europe are lean- 
ing toward independent policies. These satellites are 
seeking increased trade and closer diplomatic relations 
with the Free World. 

The United .States is in a position somewhat like 
that of Russia. America is no longer the undisputed 
leader of the democracies. Most European nations have 



The United Nations, New York 



Devaney from Publix 



Unllod Press Int. 



Food for the Hungry Children of 

mony underdeveloped countries is often 
supplied by major developed nations. 
But the food problem of the world has 
been seriously complicated by the pop- 
ulation explosion in many lands. 





mwi 



36oh 








become economically strong and no longer depend on 
American financial aid. France is urging that Europe 
also stop depending on America's military might for de- 
fense of the continent. France has criticized U.S. policy 
in Vietnam, where Americans helped the South Viet- 
namese fight the commimist forces of North Vietnam. 
Most of the other democracies have supported U.S. 
policy in Vietnam. But they have not always followed 
other American policies in the Far East. Some have 
diplomatic or trade relations with Communist China. 
The United States has not established such relations 
with Communist China. 

The problem of preventing war is closely linked with 
the question of how to rescue millions of persons from 
hardship and poverty. More than half the people of the 
world do not have enough food to eat. Most of these 
people cannot even read or write. Himger and illiteracy 
are widespread in the underdeveloped countries. These 
countries include the newly independent .\frican and 
Asian nations, and many Latin-American coimtries. 

The problem of widespread poverty is seriously com- 
plicated by a rapidly increasing world population. The 
increase is so rapid that it is often called the "popu- 
lation explosion." If the increase continues, the present 
world population of more than 3,000,000,000 will rise 
to about 4,000,000,000 by 1975, and will be about 
6,000,000,000 by the year 2000. The rate of population 
growth is generally much higher in the underdeveloped 
countries than in the developed countries. 

Progress in solving the great problems of our times 
depends chiefly on international cooperation. A large- 
scale war can be prevented only if the powerful nations 
settle their quarrels peaceably. If hunger and illiteracy 
are to be reduced, the developed countries must help 
the underdeveloped countries. The United Nations has 
been a forum for the peaceful settlement of several bitter 
international quarrels. In addition, UN agencies have 
helped the developed nations give aid to the underde- 



WORLD, HISTORY OF 

veloped nations. Extensive foreign aid programs arc the 
established policies of most of the large countries, in- 
cluding the United States and Russia. The major na- 
tions also provide important educational opportunities 
for many students of the underdeveloped coimtries. 

Future historians will judge how well we have met the 
challenge of our times. Looking forwar^d, President 
Lyndon B. Johnson believes history is on a course 
toward peace and security. In a speech on April 7, 1965, 
the President declared: 

". . . For centuries, nations have struggled among 
each other. But we dream of a world where disputes are 
setded by law and reason. And we will tiy to make it so. 

"For most of history, men have hated and killed 
one another in battle. But we dream of an end to war. 
And we will help to make it so. 

"'For all existence, most men have lived in poverty, 
threatened by himger. But we dream of a \\'orld where 
all are fed and charged with hope. And we will help to 
make it so. 

"The ordinary men and women of North Vietnam 
and South Vietnam, of China and India, of Russia 
and America, are brave people. They are filled with the 
same proportions of hate and fear, of love and hope. 
Most of them want the same things for themselves and 
their families. Most of them do not want their sons to 
ever die in battle, or to see their homes, or the homes 
of others, destroyed. 

"Well, this can be their world yet. Man now has the 
knowledge — always before denied — to make this planet 
serve the real needs of the people who live on it. 

"I know this will not be easy. I know how difficult 
it is for reason to guide passion, and love to master 
hate. The complexities of this world do not bow easily 
to pure and consistent answers. ..." 

T. Walter Wallbank 







"■■^P; ■ ■" wV, 



HOPE reaches the people of 
Africa, Asia, and Latin America, 
symbolizing America's efforts 
to help build a better world. 
The famous ship is a floating 
hospital and a training center 
for physicians and nurses. 







361 



WORLD HISTORY 



Study Aids 



Related Articles in World Book include: 
History of Countries 

See the History sections of the country articles, such as 
Argentina (History). See also the separate articles 
Canada, History of; United States, History of. 

History op Continents or Regions 

See the History sections of the following articles: 
Africa Central America Middle East 

Asia Europe Pacific Islands 

Balkans Latin America Southeast Asia 



Aegean Civilization 

Ancient Civilization 

Assyria 

Babylonia 

Carthage 

Chaldea 

Egypt, Ancient 

Etruscan 



Ancient Times 

Fertile Crescent 

Greece, Ancient 

Hittite 

Jews 

Lydia 

Macedonia 

Media 

Mesopotamia 

Middle Ages 



Palestine 

Parthia 

Phoenicia 

Phrygia 

Roman Empire 

Sumer 

Troy 



Aztec 

Byzantine Empire 

Crusades 

Feudalism 

Holy Roman Empire 

Hundred Years' War 

Inca 



Knights and Knighthood 

Maya 

Middle Ages 

Mongol Empire 

Moslems 

Printing (History) 

Viking 



Modern Times 



Atomic Energy 

Cold War 

Exploration and Discovery 

Foreign Aid 

French Revolution 

Industrial Revolution 

League of Nations 

Reformation 

Renaissance 

Revolution of 1848 



Revolutionary War ir 

.America 
.Sc\en Years' War 
Space Travel 
.Succession Wars 
Thirty Years' War 
United Nations 
Vienna, Congress of 
World War I 
World War II 



(^ther Related Articles 

Archaeology Indian, American Religion 

Architecture Law .Science 

Civilization Literature Sculpture 

Communism Migration Slavery 

Culture Music Socialism 

Democracy Painting War 

Government Population World 

History Prehistoric Man Writing 

Outline 

I. Ancient Times 

■\. Cradles of Civilization 
B. Civilization Advances 
II. The Middle Ages 

A. Western Europe During the Middle Ages 

B. The Byzantine Empire 

C. The Moslem Empire 

D. China During the Middle .Vges 

E. Japan During the Middle Ages 

F. India During the Middle Ages 

C. Otlier Civilizations During the Middle Ages 
III. Modern Times— Early Period: W-'iS-lOOO 

A. The Renaissance 

B. The Age of Reason 

C. Democracy and Nationalism 

D. The Industrial Re\olution 

E. The Close of an Era 



IV. Modern Times— the 1900's 

A. Worid Wars I and II 

B. The Rise of New Nations 

C. The Rise of Communism 
V. The World Today 

Questions 

What people developed cuneiform writing? Why is 
such writing of major importance in world history? 

How did the Byzantine Empire help prescr\'e the civi- 
lization of Western Europe during the Middle Ages? 

What live attitudes shaped the basic philosophy of Eu- 
rope's "wonderful centin'y"? 

How do we know that the Indus Valley people traded 
with the people of the Middle East during .Ancient 
Times? 

What are the chief weapons used by both sides in the 
Cold War? 

What basic idea was championed by the artists and 
scholars of the Renaissance? 

What are the two principal ways in which the LInited 
Nations works for peace? 

What major contributions to present-day civilization 
were made by the ancient Hebrews? The Phoenicians? 

What people de\'eloped the first civilization of the Eu- 
ropean mainland? What was their most important con- 
tribution to Western civilization? 

Why did civilization advance in China but not in India 
during the Middle Ages? 

Books for Young Readers 

Falls, Charles B. The First 3000 Tears. Viking, 1960. 
Foster, Genevieve S. George Washington's World. Scrib- 

ner, 1941. Abraham LineohCs World. 1944. Augustus Cae- 
sar's World. 1949. The World of Captain John .Smith, 1580- 

16.31. 19.i9. 
HiLLYER, Virgil M. A Child's History oj the World. Rev. 

ed. Meredith, 1951. 
Life (Periodical). The Epic of Man. A special edition for 

young rcadei's. Golden Press, 1962. 
Lucas, Jannette M. Man's First Million Tears. Harcourt, 

1941. 
QuENNELL, Marjorie. Everyday Life in Prehistoric Times. 

Putnam, 1959. Everyday Life in Roman and Anglo-Saxon 

Times. Rev. ed. Putnam, 1959. 
Seeger, Elizabeth. The Pageant oJ Chinese History. 4th 

ed. McKay, 1962. This is one title in a Pageant of series 

that describes many countries. 
Van Loon, Hendrik Willem. The Story of Mankind. New 

enl. ed. Liveright, 1951. 

Books for Older Readers 

Bullock, Alan, ed. The Doubleday Pictorial Library of 

World History: Civilization from its Beginnings. Double- 
day, 1962. 
DuRANT, William. The Story of Civilization. 9 vols. Simon 

&amp; .Schuster, 1935-1965. Vol. I, Our Oriental Heritage. 

Vol. H, The Life of Greece. Vol. Ill, Caesar and Christ. 

Vol. IV, The Age of Faith. Vol. V, The Renaissance. 

Vol. VI, The Reformation. Vol. VII, The .Ai^e of Reason 

liegms. Vol. VIII, The Age of Louts XIV. Vol. IX, The 

Age of Voltaire. 
Langer, William L., ed. An Encyclopedia of World History. 

3rd ed. Houghton, 1952. 
McNeil, William H. The Rise of the West: A History of 

the Human Community. LIniv. of Chicago Press, 1963. 
Toynbee, Arnold J. A Study nf History. 2 vols. O.xford, 

1947, 1957. .An abridgment by D. C. Somersell of the 

10-volume set. 
Wallbank, T. Walter, and others. Civilization: Past and 

Present. 2 vols. 5th ed. Scott, Foresman, 1965. 
Wallbank, T. Walter, and Schrier, Arnold. Living 

World History. 2nd ed. .Scott, Foresman, 1964. 
Wells, H. G. The Outline of History. Rev. ed. Doubleday, 

1961. 



362 



WORLD AFFAIRS CENTER. See Foreign Policy 
Association. 

WORLD BANK. See International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development. 

WORLD CALENDAR. See Calendar (Clalcndar 
Reform). 

WORLD COUNCIL OF CHURCHES is an organization 
of about 200 Protestant, Anglican, Old Catholic, and 
Eastern Orthodo.x churches in 80 countries and 10 
territories. Its member churches have about 300 mil- 
lion members. The Council carries on many social, 
religious, and educational activities through a com- 
mission and four divisions. 

The Commission of the Churches of International 
Affairs studies Christian responsibility in international 
affairs. It sends obsei-vers to the United Nations and to 
diplomatic conferences. The Division of Inter-Church 
Aid, Refugee, and \Vorld Sei-vice has resettled more 
than 250,000 refugees. It also aids the sick and under- 
privileged and disaster victims, and grants scholarships 
to students. The Division of Ecumenical Action 
stresses the role of laymen and religious education. It 
operates international and interdenominational youth 
work camps. 

The Division of Studies deals with the relationship 
between the church and the world, and the religious 
and organizational barriers separating churches. The 
Division of World Mission and Evangelism carries on 
the work of the International Missionaiy C^ouncil, which 
merged with the World Council of Churches in 1961. 

The Council was founded in Amsterdam, The Nether- 
lands, in 1 948. It has since met in assembly in Evanston, 
111., in 1954, and in New Delhi, India, in 1961, The 
assembly picks si.x presidents and a 100-member central 
cominittee that meets annually. Headquarters are in Ge- 
neva, Switzerland. The Council also has an office at 475 
Rivereide Drive, New York 27, N.Y. Roswell p. Barnes 

WORLD COURT. See International Court of 
Justice. 

WORLD ECONOMIC CONFERENCE OF 1933 was a 
meeting held as a result of the depression of the 1930's. 
It met in London in 1933 and tried to stabilize cur- 
rencies. It failed when President Franklin D. Roosevelt 
refused to support its recommendations. 

WORLD GOVERNMENT. Many persons believe that 
a single authorily should dispense justice and maintain 
law and order for the whole world. They would like 
to see a world government make the major decisions 
concerning security and the welfare of individuals 
that more than 1 25 separate national governments now 
make. World government could come about if one 
country conquered all the rest, just as the Romans 
conquered all the lands around the Mediterranean Sea. 
But persons who favor world government today think 
of it as the result of persuasion and agreement. 

Some persons began dreaming of a world government 
as early as the 1300"s. The idea did not win wide public 
support until just before World War II. After that war, 
many persons accepted the idea. These persons believed 
that war was inevitable as long as separate national 
governments existed. They pointed out that war had 
become a threat to the survival of the whole human 
race. They argued that countries should give a world 
government the right to make the final decisions re- 
garding war and peace. Some schemes for world govern- 



WORLD SERIES 

ment foresee a federal system, in which subdivisions of 
the world would continue to perform some govern- 
mental functions. Most advocates are unwilling to wait 
for international organizations to grow slowly into a 
world government. They v\'ant the change to come 
peacefully, but all at once. 

Persons who favor world government are active in 
most countries of the western world. But many persons 
oppose the idea. Critics of world government ask how 
the peoples of the world could reach agreement on such 
a topic in the face of acute present conflicts. They point 
out that, if the conflicts between East and West die 
down, making agreement on world government attain- 
able, the need for such a government is also diminished. 

Some of the questions that must be solved include 
the problem o( finding leaders for a world government, 
the problem of keeping it from becoming tyrannical, 
and the problem of avoiding civil wars, often bloodier 
than international ones. WillumT. R. Fox 

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION (WHO), a spe- 
cialized agency of the United Nations, is the first world- 
wide health organization in history. It seeks to promote 
health and prevent the outbreak of diseases by attacking 
them at their source. It provides help to countries in 
strengthening public health services. It plans and co- 
ordinates international efforts to solve health problems, 
with special attention to malaria, tuberculosis, and 
venereal, virus, and parasitic diseases. It works with 
member countries and other health organizations to 
collect information on epidemics, develop international 
quarantine regulations, and standardize medical drugs, 
vaccines, and treatment. 

The principal organs of WHO include the World 
Health Assembly, the Executive Board, and the Secre- 
tariat, headed by a Director General. The assembly 
chooses 18 member nations to name technically quali- 
fied citizens to the executive board. About 120 countries 
belong to WHO, The organization maintains head- 
ciuarters in Geneva, Switzerland, It was founded on 
April 7, 1948, and has designated April 7 each vear as 
'■World Health Day." 

WORLD MAP. See Aviation; World, 

WORLD MEDICAL ASSOCIATION is an organization 
of national medical associations, to which 53 countries 
belong. Organized in 1947, it has adopted an inter- 
national code of medical ethics. It maintains head- 
quarters at 10 Columbus Circle, New York 19, N.Y, 

WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION 
(WMO) is one of the specialized agencies of the United 
Nations. It promotes international cooperation in mete- 
orology by helping to establish networks of meteoro- 
logical stations in all parts of the world, and by ex- 
changing weather information as rapidly as possible. 

The WMO was founded as the International Mete- 
orological Organization in 1878. It changed its name 
officially early in 1951, The United Nations Charter 
provides that the UN may seek advice and help from 
specialized international agencies. This provision made 
it possible for the WMO to begin working with the 
UN in December, 1951. The WMO has headquarters 
in Geneva, Switzerland. It has a congress, an executive 
committee, and a secretariat. 

WORLD SERIES. See Baseball (The World Series). 




WORLD WAR I 

WORLD WAR I ranks second only to World War II 
as the most bloody and most costly war in modern 
history. Two pistol shots signaled the start of war. An 
armistice ended the fighting four years later. 

Shortly before noon on Sunday, June 28, 1914, crowds 
gathered in Sarajevo, the capital of the Austrian prov- 
ince of Bosnia. They came to see Archduke Francis 
Ferdinand, heir to the throne of Austria-Hungary, and 
his wife Sophie. Suddenly a man jumped on the running 
board of the royal touring car and fired a pistol. Two 
shots struck Ferdinand and one hit Sophie, who was 
trying to shield him. They both died almost immedi- 
ately. The assassin was Gavnilo Princip, a young Bos- 
nian student who had lived in Serbia. 

Austria-Hungary suspected that its small neighbor, 
Serbia, had approved the plot to kill Ferdinand. As a 
result, it declared war on Serbia on July 28, 191 4. By 
October 30, the Central Powers— Austria-Hungary, 
Germany, and the Ottoman Empire — were at war with 
the Allies — Belgium, France, Great Britain, Russia, and 




GERMANY 




Belgium (Aug. 4, 1914) 
Brazil (Oct. 27, 1917) 
British Empire (including 

Canada) (Aug. 4, 1914) 
China (Aug. 14, 1917) 
Costa Rica (May 25, 1918) 
Cuba (Apr. 8, 1917) 
France (Aug. 3, 1914) 
Greece (July 2, 1917) 
Guatemala (Apr. 25, 1918) 
Haiti (July 15, 1918) 
Honduras (July 19, 1918) 



Austria-Hungary 

(July 28, 1914) 
Bulgaria (Oct. 5, 1915) 



Italy (May 23, 1915) 
Japan (Aug. 23, 1914) 
tiberia (Aug. 4, 1917) 
Montenegro (Aug. 8, 1914) 
Nicaragua (May 7, 1918) 
Panama (Apr. 9, 1917) 
Portugal (Mar. 9, 1916) 
Romania (Aug. 27, 1916) 
Russia (Aug. 1, 1914) 
Serbia (July 28, 1914) 
Thailand (July 22, 1917) 
United Stales (Apr. 6, 1917) 



Germany (Aug. 1, 1914) 
Ottoman Empire (now Turkey) 
(Oct. 30, 1914) 



364 



The date given after each country's name is the date on 
which it entered World War I. Blue areas on the map repre- 
sent countries that were neutral during the war. 



Serbia. Other countries later joined in the fighting. 

A single act — the shooting of Ferdinand — marked the 
outbreak of war. But there were several basic causes of 
W'orld \Var I. These causes included the growth of 
nationalism, the system of military alliances that created 
a balance of power, the competition for colonies and 
other territory, and the use of secret diplomacy. 

At the beginning of the war, Austria-Hungary and 
Germany planned to conquer new territories and col- 
onies. They won early victories on the western and east- 
ern fronts. But, in the First Battle of the Marne, in 
September, 191 4, the Allies stopped the German ad- 
vance and ended Germany's chances for a quick victory. 
The opposing armies settled down to trench warfare. 
The Allies seized Germany's colonies and blockaded it. 

The United States tried to remain neutral in the 
early years of World War I. The British angered Amer- 
icans by searching neutral ships and violating the prin- 
ciple of freedom of the seas. But American anger turned 
against the Central Powers with news of German sub- 
marines sinking unarmed passenger ships, and \vith 
stories of German atrocities against civilians. Americans 
were convinced that, in joining the Allies, they would 



WORLD WAR I 

men of the Central Powers lost their lives. In all, the 
four years of w-ar cost over $337,000,000,000. 

Peace agreements after the war changed the map of 
the world. New governments appeared in Austria, 
Czechoslovakia, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Hungary, 
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Russia, Yugoslavia, and 
many countries of western Asia. But World War I did 
not setde the world's problems. It sowed the seeds that 
plunged the world into war again in less than 20 years. 

Causes of the War 

The basic causes of W'orid War I went as far back 
as the early 1 800's. Peoples controlled by other countries 
began to develop feelings of nationalism. Countries 
grouped together in rival military alliances to advance 
their own ainis. They competed for colonies and other 
lands. Finally, governments clouded international rela- 
tions b\' carrying on secret diplomacy. 

Nationalism. The French Revolution of 1 789 brought 
about a new feeling of nationalism. French-speaking 
peoples, German-speaking peoples, Italian-speaking 



Assassination of Austria- 
Hungary's Archduke Francis Fer- 
dinand, right, triggered World 
War I. Gavrilo Princip, a stu- 
dent who had lived in Serbia, 
fired the shots that killed Fer- 
dinand. On July 28, 1914, Aus- 
tria-Hungary declared war on 
Serbia to begin World War I. 




ted Press Int. 



help "make the world safe for democracy." American 
doughboys, as the soldiers were called, marched aboard 
troopships singing George M. Cohan's "Over There." 
American factories sent a stream of supplies to the 
fighting forces. The entry of the United States into the 
war boosted Allied morale, and fresh American troops 
reinforced the battered Allied armies. The fighting 
ended with an armistice on Nov. 11, 1918. 

Much of the war involved hand-to-hand combat in 
trenches between the largest armies ever seen up to that 
time. New and improved weapons gave each side more 
efficient machines to kill the enemy. Mechanized vehi- 
cles—tanks, trucks, automobiles, and motorcycles- 
speeded the war on land. For the first time, airplanes 
and airships fought in the air and bombed soldiers and 
civilians. Submarines torpedoed merchant ships without 
warning. More than 5.000,000 Allied soldiers and other 
servicemen died from wounds, disease, and other causes. 
In addition, more than 3,300,000 soldiers and service- 



peoples, and others began to feel that they should each 
have a separate national government in a country where 
everyone spoke the same language. 

After the Napoleonic wars ended in 1815, the Con- 
gress of Vienna tried to satisfy the desires of Europe's 
rulers, rather than the wishes of the people. Diplomats 
drew the boundaries of Europe to suit their rulers. They 
often divided people of the same nationaliU', putting 
them in different countries instead of uniting them. 
See Vienna, Congress of. 

Some of the unpopular decisions of the Congress of 
Vienna brought violence and some national dissatisfac- 
tions. For example, at the end of the Franco-Prussian 
War in 1871, Germany seized the province of Alsace 
and most of Lorraine from France (see Franco-Prussian 
War). Frenchmen looked for\vard to the day when they 
could regain these provinces. 

Austria-Hungary controlled lands that several of its 
neighbors thought should belong to them. Serbia, a 



HIGHLIGHTS OF WORLD WAR I 



]914 

June 28 Archduke Francis Ferdinand was assassinated. 

July 28 Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia. 

July 29 Russia ordered general mobilization. 

Aug. 1 Germany declared war on Russia. 

Aug. 3 Germany declared war on France. 

Aug. 4 Germany invaded Belgium. Great Britain de- 
clared war on Germany. 

Aug. 26-31 The Germans crushed the Russian Second 
Army at Tannenberg. 

Sept. 1-Oct. 3 The Russians defeated the Austrians in 
the Battles of Lcmberg. 

Sept. 6-9 The .\llies stopped the Germans in the First 
Battle of the Marnc. 

Oct. 21-Nov. 17 Germany failed to reach the English 
Channel in the First Battle of Ypres. 

Oct. 30 The Turks joined the Central Powers. 

1915 

Feb. 18 Germany began its attempted blockade of 

Great Britain. 
Apr. 22 The Germans first used poison gas, in the 

Second Battle of Ypres. 

Allied troops landed on the Gallipoli Peninsula. 

The Austrians began an oflfcnsive in Galicia. 

A German submarine sank the liner Lusilmuu. 

Italy declared war on Austria-Hungary. 



Apr. 
May 
May 
May 



25 
2 
7 

23 



1916 



Jan. 
Feb. 

Apr. 

May 

June 

July 

Aug. 
Sept. 

Feb. 

Apr. 
June 
July 

July 

Nov. 
Nov. 

Dec. 
Dec. 



Jan. 8 

Mar. 3 
Mar. 21 
June 15 
June 23 
June 25 
July 21 
Aug. 6 

Sept. 26 

Sept. 29 



Oct. 

Nov. 
Nov. 



Nov. 11 
366 



9 British troops withdrew from Gallipoli. 
21 -Dec. 15 The .Allies halted the German drive in 

the Battle of Verdun. 
29 Kut al-Amara, Mesopotamia, with 10,000 

British troops, surrendered to the Turks. 
31-June 1 The British fleet fought the German 
fleet in the Battle of Jutland. 
4 Russia began an offensive in eastern Galicia. 
1-Nov. 18 The Allies advanced in the Battles of 
the Somme. 
27 Italy declared war on Germany. 
15 The British army first used tanks. 

1917 

1 Germany began unrestricted submarine war- 
fare. 

6 The United States declared war on Germany. 
26 The first American troops landed in France. 
31 -Aug. 9 The Germans broke up Russia's last 

offensive. 
31 -Nov. 10 The Germans stopped the Allies in 
the Third Battle of Ypres. 

7 The Bolsheviks seized power in Russia. 
20-Dec. 3 In the Battle of Cambrai, the Allies 

made the first great tank attack. 
9 Jerusalem fell to the Allies. 
15 Russia signed an arinistice with Germany. 

1918 

President VVoodrow Wilson announced his 

"Fourteen Points" as the basis for peace. 

Russia signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. 

Germany launched its last great offensive. 

Austria-Hungary fought its last offensive. 

The Allies occupied Murmansk, Russia. 

American marines captured Belleau Wood. 

Allied troops recaptured Chateau-Thierry. 

The last German offensive failed in the Second 

Battle of the Marne. 

The Allies began their final offensive on the 

western front. 

Bulgaria signed an armistice. 

The Ottoman Empire signed an armistice. 

Austria signed an armistice. 

Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany abdicated. 

Germany signed the armistice. 



GREAT 



Plymouth 



ENGLISH CHANNEL 



Sinking of Neutral Ships 

by German submarines caused 
the United States to go to war. 



• Brest 



Submarines menaced Allied 
ships and by themselves nearly 
won the war for Germany. 



Slavic nation, wanted the provinces of Bosnia and 
Hercegovina, because it wanted an outlet to the sea 
and because so many Slavs lived there. Italy wanted 
to take the Trentino region and Trieste away from 
Austria-Hungary, because many Italians lived in these 
places. The Czechs and the Slovaks also sought to free 
themselves from Austrian and Hungarian conlrol. 

People of many different nationalities lived in Russia, 
including Estonians, Finns, Latvians, Lithuanians, and 
Poles. They, too, wanted their freedom. 

In the Balkan Peninsula, Bulgarians, Greeks, Roma- 
nians, Serbs, and other peoples reacted strongly against 
long years of Turkish misrule and interference by other 
countries. Because of the many small wars between 
these peoples, the Balkan Peninsula was often called 
"the witches' cauldron" or "the powder keg of Europe." 

The leaders of the Congress of Vienna might have 
taken care of the national desires of many people in 
central and eastern Europe if they had wanted to do so. 
But they decided otherwise. 

Some countries had "war cults," or organizations that 
glorified war. Members of these groups sometimes 
insulted neighboring peoples, who were quick to take 
offense. Warmongers sneered at foreign ways of doing 
things. Often, sensational newspaper stories helped 
spread their propaganda. .Some German leaders vigor- 
ously urged commercial and political expansion to the 
east, especially in Asia. They called this policy of 



I 



NORTH SEA 

Zeppelins of the German air 
arm began bombing London in 
1915. They made easy targets. 



t^ETHf^^ 



^ 



Dover 



BRITAIN 



Zeebtugge , ; 
• Oslend 
&gt; Dixmude 



'V/ 



Antwerp 



lT 



Boulogne 1'^^ 

Neuve-Choppole f 

/ ■• tens 



The Armistice ending World 
War I was signed in a railroad 
car in France on Nov. 11, 1918. 



louvoin 








1 u 


M. 








• 


Liege 




• Nnmur 






4 




Cologne 



Coblenz • 



x^ 



^-^ 
'^^ 



Moinz 



Air Battles raged over the 
Western Front as individual 
pilots engoged in "dog fights." 



FRANC 



THE WESTERN FRONT IN WORLD WAR I 

^^^i^B Final Battle Line on Nov. 11, 1918 
^^^■^^^ Farthest German Advance in 1914 
^^^^ Hindenburg Defense Line in 1917 
^ 1^ ^^ Farthest German Advance in 1918 



Choumonl 



SWITZERLAND 



expansion Drang nach Osten, or "the drive toicard the east.'' 

Military Alliances proved to be another fundamental 
cause of World War I. After Chancellor Otto von 
Bismarck unified the German Empire in 1871 , he hoped 
for a period of international peace. Bismarck felt that 
France's desire to regain Alsace-Lorraine might be the 
chief threat to peace. He sought allies whose support 
would discourage other nations from attacking Germany. 

The Triple Alliance. In 1882, Germany, Austria- 
Hungary, and Italy signed a treaty called the Triple 
Alliance (see Triple Alli.\nce). It was designed to pro- 
tect its members against attack by France or Russia. 
Germany and Italy feared France, and Germany and 
Austria-Hungary feared Russia. 

The three members of the Alliance formed a powerful 
bloc in central Europe. But Austria-Hungary and Italy 
were not really friendly. They quarreled over territory 
that Italy thought it should have. Both competed for 
control of the Adriatic Sea. When war broke out in 
1914, Italy did not stand by its alliance obligation. It 
had made a secret treaty with France in 1902. As a 
result, it remained neutral for a time, then declared war 
on Austria-Hungary. 

The Entente Cordiale. After the formation of the Triple 
Alliance, the other great countries of Europe found 
themselves at a disadvantage. In case of an international 
crisis. Great Britain, France, and Russia would have to 
act separately, but the countries of the Triple Alliance 



could act together. In 1894, France signed a defensive 
alliance with Russia. 

Only Great Britain then remained isolated. It faced 
growing commercial and naval rivalry with Germany. 
In 1904, Great Britain and France reached an Entente 
Cordiale, or cordial understanding. By the terms of this 
agreement, they settled their many disagreements about 
colonies. The two nations became diplomatic partners. 

The Triple Entente. Ne.\t, France succeeded in bring- 
ing Great Britain and Russia together. In 1907, these 
two nations signed the Anglo-Russian Entente, somewhat 
like the Entente Cordiale. The new agreement linking 
France, Russia, and Great Britain was called the Triple 
Entente (see Triple Ente.nte). 

International Disputes. Now Europe was divided into 
two armed camps, the Triple Alliance opposed to the 
Triple Entente. Each gioup attracted a number of 
smaller allies. Any quarrel between two European coun- 
tries could quickly involve all six great powers. 

One important dispute concerned Morocco, "the 
Pearl of North Africa." Between 1905 and 191 2, France 
came close to war with Germany several times over con- 
trol of this large and valuable region. Another trouble 
spot lay in Bosnia and Hercegovina. Austria-Hungary 
had occupied these former Turkish provinces in 1878, 
and formally annexed them in 1 908. Russia promised in 
advance that it would not oppose the annexation. In 
return, Austria-Hungary agreed to favor giving Russian 



WORLD WAR I 

warships permission to pass freely through the Straits at 
Constantinople. But Russia could not get the other 
major countries to approve its plan to open the Straits. 
It tried to "save face" by insisting on an international 
conference to confirm Austria-Hungary's action. When 
Austria-Hungary refused to agree, war seemed near. But 
France was not ready at this time to support Russia over 
a Balkan quarrel. Germany, on the other hand, stood 
willing to support Austria-Hungary. Russia finally gave 
up its demand for a conference. But the Russians en- 
couraged the Serbs in their desire to seize Bosnia and 
Hercegovina from Austria-Hungary. 

Then came the Balkan Wars of igia and 191 3 (see 
Balkans). The Balkan countries fought for more terri- 
tor\% first from Turkey, then from each other. The 
results weakened Germany's friend, the Ottoman Em- 
pire (now Turkey), and doubled the size of Austria- 
Hungary's enemy, Serbia. 

Competition for Colonies. Much of world history 
during the late 1800's and early i goo's involved rivalry 
over trade and commerce. The great powers were be- 
coming increasingly industrialized. They competed for 
markets in which to sell or exchange their products. 
They quarreled over the control of sources of raw ma- 
terials. They tried to find and monopolize places in which 
to invest money. They competed for new sources of food, 
for new regions to colonize, and for overseas bases from 
which to supply their ships. Even missionary rivalries 
played a part in expansion during this period. The 
British were particularly concerned about German 
colonial expansion. The growth of the German navy 
threatened British supremacy on the high seas. The 
Russians hoped to dominate affairs in the Balkans. 

Secret Diplomacy. The nations of the world at this 
time did not have any international organization to 
help settle disputes. Sometimes, all the ministers in a 
cabinet did not know that some of their colleagues had 
made secret agreements with other countries. Often the 
cabinet did not keep the legislature fully informed of 
secret agreements. For example, British Foreign Minister 
Sir Edward Grey assured France in 1912 that Great 
Britain would provide naval aid in case of war. But he 
did not tell Parliament of his promise. 

The tense international situation led the German am- 
bassador to France, Wilhelm von Schoen, to remark in 
1914: "Peace remains at the mercy of an accident." On 
June 28, that accident occurred when GavTilo Princip 
shot Archduke Francis Ferdinand in Sarajevo. 

Men, Baltlefronts, and Strategy 

At the beginning of World War I, the Central Powers 
had the immediate advantages and won most of the 
early victories. But the Allies had time and resources on 
their side, and won the final battles. Fighting took place 
on three chief battlefronts: western, eastern, and south- 
ern. Germany planned to overwhelm France in a quick 
campaign, then help Austria-Hungary crush Russia. 
The Allies planned to defeat the Central Powers by 
attacking on the western and eastern fronts. 

Men Under Arms. At the outbreak of \Vorld War I, 
Germany had the best-trained and best-equipped fight- 
ing force in Europe. The Germans easily changed their 
factories into war plants. The Central Powers formed a 

368 



solid land block. They had enemies around them, but 
not between them. They could speed supplies and rein- 
forcements to an)- front. Great Britain and France found 
it hard to help Russia. They had to send men and 
materials through dangerous waters, because the Cen- 
tral Powers had cut off all land routes. 

The Allies had far greater manpower than the Cen- 
tral Powers, and Russia had the largest number of 
soldiers in reserve. The Allies also had greater resources 
of materials. They took longer to mobilize than Ger- 
many did, but they eventually achieved overwhelming 
strength. Because of the British navy, the Allies con- 
trolled the seas. They could get much-needed supplies, 
and also prevent Germany from receiving supplies. The 
Allies mobilized more than 42,000,000 men and women 
during the war. The mobilized strength of the Central 
Powers reached more than 22.800,000 men and women. 

War Leaders. Herbert H. Asquith and David Lloyd 
George served as prime ministers of Great Britain. 
French premiers included Rene Viviani, Aristide Briand, 
and Georges Clemenceau. .Antonio Salandra, Paolo 
Boselli, and V'ittorio Orlando served as premiers of 
Italy. Czar Nicholas II ruled Russia. Woodrow Wilson 
was President of the United States throughout the war. 
Kaiser Wilhelm II ruled Germany. After Emperor 
Francisjosephof Austria-Hungary died in 1916, Charles 
I became emperor. Other sovereigns of the Central 
Powers included King Ferdinand I of Bulgaria and 
Mohammed V of the Ottoman Empire. 

The chief Allied military commanders included Mar- 
shals Ferdinand Foch, Joseph Joffre, and Henri Philippe 
Petain of France; Field Marshals Sir John French and 
Sir Douglas Haig, Adm. Sir John Jellicoe, and Vice 
Adm. Sir David Beatty of Great Britain; Generals Luigi 
Cadorna and .\rmando Diaz of Italy; Grand Duke 
Nicholas Nicholaievich of Russia; and Gen. John J. 
Pershing of the United States. Leading military com- 
manders of the Central Powers included Field Marshals 
Paul von Hindenburg and August von Mackensen and 
Generals Erich von Falkenhayn and Erich LudendorfT 
of Germany; and Field Marshal Conrad von Hotzen- 
dorf and Gen. Arz von Strassenberg of Austria-Hungary. 

Battlefronts. Most fighting took place on the western, 
eastern, and southern battlefronts. 

The western front at its greatest length stretched about 
600 miles, from the English Channel to the border of 
Switzerland. Men in trenches faced each other across 
guns and barbed-wire barriers. 

The eastern front extended more than 1,100 miles, 
from Riga on the Baltic Sea to the shores of the Black 
Sea. It ran about parallel to the eastern boundaries of 
Germany and Austria-Hungary in 1914. 

The southern front ran from Switzerland along the 
Italian frontier to Trieste for about 320 miles. 

Another battlefront developed in the .southern Balkan 
region. It extended for about 300 miles. Other areas 
that saw fighting included Egypt, Mesopotamia (now 
Iraq), Palestine, and German possessions in Asia, Africa, 
and the Pacific Ocean. 

Strategy of the War. Count Alfred von Schlieffen, 
chief of the German General Staflf, planned Germany's 
basic strategy in 1905, and modified it in 191 2. The 
Schlieffen plan called for German armies to crush France 
in a quick campaign by sweeping in a great fanlike 
drive through neutral Belgium. Next, the Germans 



planned to crush Russia, then lorce an isolated Great 
Britain to surrender. After conquering the Balkans, 
German troops would sweep into Asia. \'on Schlieffen 
expected a two-front war. but planned that Austria- 
Hungary and a small German force in East Prussia 
would handle the eastern front. 

Allied strateg)' called for attacks by the French armies 
in the Lorraine area immediately upon the outbreak of 
war. On the eastern front. Russia intended to invade 
Germany through East Prussia, and attack Austria- 
Hungary in Galicia. It hoped to strike westward at 
Germany wliile .Mlied armies rolled eastward. 

New Weapons and new methods of warfare developed 
during W'orld War I. The machine gun was the most 
destructive instrument to appear in the war (see M.\- 
CHiNE Gun). It caused more than 90 of every 100 
casualties. In .September. 1916, the British army first 
used the tank (see Tank, Mii-iiar^')- The war might 
well liave ended sooner if the British had waited to use 
this awesome weapon until they had large nimibers 
available. The Germans were horrified at first b\' the 
strange steel monsters. But they quickh- developed land 
mines and tanks of their own as countermeasures. The 
demands of trench warfare forced the fighting nations to 
develop grenades, trench mortars, and heavy artillery. 

The submarine came into use for the first time on a 
large scale. The German submarine fleet threatened 
British naval supremacy. But submarine warfare failed 
to starve out Great Britain, and Germany's sinking of 
unarmed ships helped bring the United .States into the 
war on the side of the .'\llies. .See .Submarine. 

."Kir warfare also developed in World War I. At the 
outbreak of the war, each army had several hundred 
planes. These had no fixed guns, and were intended 
mainly for reconnaissance. As the war went on, air- 
planes also directed shellfire, photographed enemy 
bases, shot at troops, scattered propaganda leaflets, and 
battled each other in '"dogfights." By 1917. small pur- 
suit planes could travel about 150 miles an hour, and 



WORLD WAR I 

slower bombers could carry about two tons of bombs 
(see Air Force). The Germans used dirigible balloons, 
or airships, called ^eppelins. for observation, and for 
bombing raids (see Airship). 

In 1915, Germany first used poison gas. Soon the 
Allies began to use it. The effects in the beginning were 
serious. But both sides developed protective measures 
and reduced the danger. .See Poison G.^s. 

The War Begins (1914) 

Death of an Archduke. The conflicts between .Austria- 
Hungary and .Serbia chiefly concerned ownership of 
Bosnia and Hercegovina. The .Serbs believed that they 
had a natural right to these two provinces. Serbia 
needed them as a direct outlet to the .Adriatic .Sea so it 
could ship products, especially hogs, to market without 
having to send them across .Austro-Hungarian soil. The 
.Serbs were a highly nationalistic and turbulent people. 
The Austro-Hungarians closed their borders to ship- 
ments whenever .Serbian political agitation became too 
tense. The .Serbs called this practice "pig politics." 

A group of Serbs formed a secret society called 
"Union or Death," or "the Black Hand." This group 
attempted to terrorize Austro-Hungarian officials into 
satisfying .Serbia's territorial aims. Members included 
high Serbian army officers. The society learned that 
.Archduke Francis Ferdinand, heir to the thrones of 
.Austria and Hungary and nephew of Emperor Francis 
Joseph, planned to visit neighboring Bosnia in June, 
1914. The Black Hand decided to kill him. .Some young 
Bosnian revolutionaries were living in .Serbia because 
the Austro-Hungarian government had exiled them as 
undesirable. They received training in assassination. 

As Ferdinand and his wife rode through .Sarajevo, a 
Bosnian revolutionary threw a bomb at their car. The 
bomb exploded in the roadway behind the automobile. 
Later that day, Gavrilo Princip, another of the trained 



Tanks fought in battle for the 
first time at Flers-Courcelette, 
France, in a British offensive in 
September, 1916. 



Automatic Weapons mode 
the war unusually bloody. Amer- 
ican soldiers used 37-mm. guns 
to silence machine-gun nests. 




369 



WORLD WAR I 

assassins, jumped on the running board and fired the 
shots that touched off World War I. 

The Auslro-Hungarian government had no proof that 
Serbian officials were involved in the murder plot. But 
Foreign Minister Leopold von Berchtold suspected them. 
He also wanted to end .Serbian agitation against Austria- 
Hungary. Von Berchtold obtained a promise from Ger- 
many that it would sujiport him in any move he might 
make against Serbia, 'fhen he won Emperor Francis 
Joseph to his view. On July 23, 1914, von Berchtold 
sent a harsh ultimatum to Serbia demanding that it 
allow Austrian officials to take part in the trials of 
persons involved in the assassination. 

Mobilization. Russia hoped to extend its political 
influence over the Balkans. It assured the Serbs that it 
would not allow .Austrian aggression against their coun- 
try. Serbia then rejected the demand for Austro-Hun- 
garian officials to take part in the murder trial. Serbia 
suggested that the conflict be submitted to an inter- 
national conference for arbitration. But Austria-Hungary 
refused this proposal, and declared war on Serbia on 
July 28, 1914. It realized that Russia might come to 
Serbia's aid. But if that happened, Austria-Hungary 
could count on help from Germany. 

Germany and Great Britain tried vainly to keep the 
war from spreading to other countries. Germany feared 
that it would have to fight on two fronts — against Russia 
in the east and against Russia's ally, France, in the west. 
When the Germans found Russia hastily preparing for 
hostilities, they knew that war was at hand. On Aug. 1 , 
1914, Germany declared war on Russia. It asked 
France to declare its neutrality. When the French an- 
swered evasively, it declared war on I-'rance on August 3. 

The March Through Belgium. Germany's war plans 
provided for an invasion of Belgium. But, as a political 
gesture, Germany asked Belgium for permission to send 
troops across its territory as the easiest road to Paris. 
Actually, German troops were already moving across 
the Belgian border. Germany promised to pay after the 
war for any damages to Belgian property. But King 
Albert I of Belgium refused permission. He is reported to 
have declared: "Belgium is a nation, not a road." A 
treaty which had been signed in 1 839 guaranteed that 
Belgium would always be neutral. When Great Britain 
asked Germany to respect this treaty, German Chan- 
cellor Theobald von Bethmann-HoUweg called it "just 
a scrap of paper." On August 2, German troops moved 
into Luxembourg, and on August 4 they invaded Bel- 
gium. Great Britain promptly declared war on Germany. 

Germany, Austria-Hungary, and their allies became 
known as the Central Powers, because of their position 
in Europe. The nations opposing them were known as 
the Allies, or the Associated Powers. 

The small Belgian army resisted courageously. But it 
could not halt the huge German army. The French sent 
a corps of troops to help the Belgians. The flaming red 
trousers, dark blue coats, and red caps the French 
soldiers wore contrasted sharply with the steel-gra&gt;' and 
green uniforms and spike-tipped helmets of the Ger- 
mans. After the Belgian cities of Liege and Brussels fell. 
Gen. Joseph Joffre allowed his Allied soldiers to retreat 
slowly while he assembled more troops. German forces 
pushed to within 1 5 miles of Paris. In September, JoflVe 



took the offensive and drove the Germans back from 
the Marne River to the Aisne River. More than 1,500,- 
000 troops fought in the First Battle of the Marne. The 
battle marked the first turning point in the war, because 
it ended Germany's chances of a quick victory. 

The Eastern Front. Russia, urged on by France, sent 
its armies into action before they were really ready. On 
August 1 7, Grand Duke Nicholas Nicholaievich's forces 
swept into East Prussia, and on August 22, they crossed 
the Galician frontier. His troops had to advance slowly, 
because of the lack of supplies. His army commanders 
did not cooperate, hindering progress. The Germans 
had time to reorganize and attack the Russian armies 
one at a time. The German high command ordered 
retired Gen. Paul von Hindenburg to the eastern front. 
In a series of campaigns around Tannenberg and the 
swampy Masurian Lakes, Von Hindenburg crushed the 
Russian armies and cleared them from East Prussia. 
More than 300,000 Russian troopswere killed, wounded, 
or reported missing. But in Galicia, the Russians 
killed and wounded more than 250,000 Austrian troops, 
and captured 100,000 others in the Battles of Lemberg 
during September and October. In the south, Austria- 
Hungary failed in three attempts to invade .Serbia. 

The Turks Enter the War. On August 2, the Ottoman 
Empire (now Turkey) had signed a secret treaty with 



'.(Ifogrod 







FARTHEST ADVANCE 
* OF GERMANS, AU5TR1ANS, 
AND HUNGARIANS 

/ 



Map of the Eastern Front During World War 



370 





'^^ 






;v&gt;c&gt;:-^ 



^ 



%&gt;^.V 







Bui Inn Holmes. Ewing Galloway 

Elaborate Systems of Trenches Faced Each Other Along the Western and Eastern Fronts. 




Germany. The Allies did not know about the treatv', 
and continued negotiations to keep the Turks neutral. 
In the last days of October, Turkish warships bombarded 
Russian ports on the Black Sea. France, Great Britain, 
and Russia declared war on the Ottoman Empire. 
Turkish troops fought the Allies in Mesopotamia, Pal- 
estine. .Sinai, and the Caucasus Mountains in Russia. 

The War al Sea. During the first year of fighting, sur- 
face ships pla&gt;ed the leading role in the war at sea. The 
British Grand Fleet bottled up the German High Sea 
Fleet in its home waters near the Kiel Canal. The few 
German surface ships at sea attacked Allied shipping in 
the North Seas. But German submarine attacks gradu- 
ally grew in strength. Vice Adm. Maximilian von Spec's 
Pacific Ocean Squadron sank two British cruisers near 
Coronel, Chile, while heading for Germany. In a later 
battle, the British fleet under \'ice Adm. Sir Doverton 
Sturdee destroyed Spec's fleet off the Falkland Islands. 

Colonies Captured. The Allies attacked Gei-many's 
overseas colonies shortly after the German invasion of 
Belgium. New Zealanders captured Samoa, in the 
Pacific. Australian troops occupied German New 
Guinea. In late August, Japan declared war on Ger- 
many and seized German holdings in China. Japanese 
forces also occupied Gemian islands in the Pacific, 
including the Marianas, Carolines, and Marshalls. 

The Second Year (1915) 

Litde land changed hands on the western front during 
the second year of World War I. The Central Powers 
made their main assault on the eastern front. Italy 
joined the Allies, making easier the Allied control of the 
Mediterranean Sea and forcing Austria-Hungary to fight 



a two-front war. The Allies failed to open the Dardanelles 
for shipments of men and weapons to Russia. 

Trench Warfare. Fighting on the western front reached 
a standstill early in 1915. The deadlock continued for 
aliBost two years. Both sides dug in and built networks 
of trenches that stretched for about 600 miles across 
France and Belgium. In some places, only a few hundred 
yards separated the opposing lines. Between these lines 
of trenches lay no-man's land. 

"Over the top !" a battlefront commander would 
shout. Infantrymen with fixed bayonets climbed out of 
the trenches and dashed across no-man's land. They 
flung their grenades, struggled through barbed-wire 
entanglements, and ran around gaping shell holes. 
Machine gun fire took a heavy toll and made successful 
charges almost impossible. 

The fighting forces developed trench systems greater 
than ever built before. They built second and third lines 
of trenches parallel to the first line. Additional trenches 
connected these lines, so that troops and supplies could 
be moved to and from the front. Huge underground 
caverns ser\'ed as first-aid stations, supply centere, and 
living quarters for troops. The trenches protected soldiers 
from enemy bullets. But troops found life miserable in 
trenches even when they were not fighting. Rain filled 
the dugouts with water and mud, and rats swarmed 
through the vermin-infested trenches. During lulls in the 
fighting, battle communiques reported: "All quiet on 
the western front." 

On April 22, the Germans unleashed a new weapon 
in their drive through Ypres to seize Calais on the French 
coast. French soldiers found a greenish-white mist drift- 
ing toward them from the enemy line. The Germans 



fARTHEST ITALIAN ADVANCE 
INTO AUSTRIA 




Map of the Italian-Austrian Front During World War 



had released poisonous chlorine gas. Some French troops 
fled when the gas attacked their eyes and throats. 
Canadian troops moved quickly to seal the gap in the 
Allied line. But the Germans did not have enough re- 
serve forces to take advantage of the breach. The gas 
had been used experimentally, and some German com- 
manders had doubted its value. The .Second Battle of 
Ypres was the first action by Ganadians in Europe. 

On the eastern front, Field Marshal August von 
Mackensen's German Eleventh Army and Austrian 
Fourth Army spearheaded a powerful offensive in 
northern Galicia and eastern Poland. By autumn, the 
C'entral Powers had driven the Russians from most of 
Galicia, Poland, and Lithuania. On October 5, Bulgaria 
joined the Central Powers. German and Bulgarian 
troops under von Mackensen later conquered .Serbia. 

The Dardanelles. Early in January, 1915, Russia 
appealed for an attack that would relieve the pressure 
on its troops in the Caucasus. The Allies planned to 
force open the Dardanelles so that they could shi]j sup- 
plies to Russia quickly. They formed an expeditionary 
force to capture the Gallipoli Peninsula and Constanti- 
nople (now Istanbul) in Turkey. An Allied fleet de- 
stroyed the forts at the entrance of the straits and ad- 
vanced part way up the straits. But on March 18, the 
fleet had to turn back after several ships struck explosive 
mines. On April 25, Allied soldiers landed on the 
peninsula. Unable to push inland, they withdrew at the 
end of the year. 

Several months before, the Allies had sent troops from 
Gallipoli to Salonika, Greece, on the only usable road 
to Serbia. At the Serbian frontier, these troops found 
themselves cut off by Bulgarian soldiers. They retreated 
to Salonika, the shipping center of the Balkans. The 
Allies did not take any serious offensive action until 1917. 

The Italian Front. Italy had been a member of the 



Triple Alliance, but it did not enter the war imme- 
diately. It claimed that the Central Powers were fighting 
an offensive war, and that it had not agreed to take part 
in such a war. Actually, Italy wanted to take some 
Austrian territories along its border. After long negotia- 
tions, Italy signed the secret Treaty of London in 1915 
with France, Great Britain, and Russia. Italy agreed to 
join the ."Mlies in exchange for land in Europe and 
Africa. Italy declared war on Austria-Hungary in 1915, 
and on Germany in 1916. As their first offensive action, 
the Italians advanced all along the border to improve 
their general position for future operations. This offen- 
sive came to a halt after Italy made the gains it wanted, 
particularlv in the Trentino in southern Austria. 

Action on the High Seas. Italy's entry into the war 
helped the Allies control the Mediterranean Sea. On 
Feb. 4, 1915, Germany declared all waters surrounding 
the British Isles to be a "war zone." It warned that all 
enemy merchant ships within the zone would be sunk. 
The United States announced that it would hold Ger- 
many responsible for any loss of American ships and 
lives in the zone. On May 7, a German submarine sank 
the British passenger liner Lusitania off Queenstown. 
The death list of 1,198 persons included 128 Americans. 
After the United States protested, Germany ordered its 
submarines not to attack neutral or passenger ships. 

The War in Africa. The Allied fleet took part in the 
African cam]5aign by blockading German East Africa. 
German troops in Cameroon and Southwest Africa sur- 
rendered to the .-Allies in 1915. Turkish troops under 
German leadership attacked the Suez Canal in Febru- 
ary, but British and Indian forces turned them back. 

The Third Year (1916) 

Great military drives broke out on all fronts in 1916. 
Germanv attacked at \'erdun, and the Austro-Hun- 



372 



garians and Italians fought battles along the Isonzo 
River. The Allies took the offensive along the Somme 
River in France, and the Russians assaulted Polish 
Galicia. The fleets of Great Britain and Germany 
clashed off Jutland in the greatest naval battle of the 
war. The Central Powers made a bid for peace based on 
"the map of Europe," keeping what they had won. 

The Battle of Verdun. On the western front, Germany 
tried to pierce the French line with a massive attack on 
Wrdun. Crown Prince Frederick VVilhelm's artillery 
shelled the city for 24 hours, starting February 2 1 . Then 
his troops attacked on a 20-mile front. A ring of defenses 
surrounded the fortress city. Gen. Henri Petain, com- 
manding the French .Second Army that defended Ver- 
dun, vowed: "They shall not pass!" Wilhelm's troops 
advanced only about four miles in six months. They 
penetrated to within four miles of the city by June. 
Unable to advance farther, the Germans went on the 
defensive to keep their gains. The French counterat- 
tacked. They suffered more than 540,000 casualties at 
Verdun, and the Germans lost more than 430,000 men. 

In the north, Gen. Sir Douglas Haig's British troops 
began an attack along the Somme River in late June 
to relieve German pressure on Verdun. In the Battle of 
Flers-Courcelette, the British introduced a new weapon, 
the tank. German losses in the Battles of the Somme 
totaled more than 500,000 men, and the Allies suffered 
more than 600,000 casualties. Kaiser Wilhelm II dis- 
missed Gen. Erich von Falkenhayn as chief of the Ger- 
man General Staff, and appointed Hindenburg in his 
place. In September, Hindenburg became supreme 
commander of all Central Powers forces. Gen. Erich 
Ludendorff continued as his chief assistant. 

The Brusilov Offensive. In May, Field Marshal Con- 
rad von Hotzendorf's Austro-Hungarian armies took 
the offensive in the rocky, mountainous Trentino area. 
The Italians fell back and called on the Russians for 
help. In order to divert some Austrian armies from the 
Trentino, Gen. Aleksey Brusilov's Russian troops at- 
tacked on a 70-mile front in Galicia as part of a general 
Russian offensive. His armies captured more than 400,- 
000 prisoners, and advanced as much as 60 miles. But 
the offensive came to a halt when German reinforce- 
ments arrived. Russia suffered more than 1,000,000 
casualties. But the Brusilov offensive forced Austria- 
Hungary to halt its attacks in the Trentino. 

On Other Fronts. Austria-Hungary had sent some of 
its troops ftom the Trentino to Galicia. Gen. Luigi 
Cadorna's Italian forces then renewed their offensive 
along the Isonzo River. But by the end of the year, the 
troops had dug in for trench warfare. 

When Romania saw that the Central Powers were not 
winning, it decided to join the Allies. On August 17, it 
signed a secret treaty that promised Romanian rule 
over Transylvania and the Banat, a region in Hungary. 
Romanian forces invaded Transylvania. By January, 
1917, Austrian, Bulgarian, German, and Turkish troops 
swept through Romania and captured Bucharest. 

The Battle of Jutland. The greatest naval battle of 
World War I took place on May 31 and June i, 1916, 
off the entrance to the Skagerrak Strait, an arm of the 
North Sea. Adm. Reinhard Scheer, commander in chief 
of the German High Sea Fleet, felt that he could defeat 
the British Grand Fleet only if he could divide it and 
fight each part separately. He directed Vice Adm. Franz 



WORLD WAR I 

Hipper's scouting squadron to attract a part of the 
British fleet. His own main battle force would then fol- 
low Hipper and destroy the main British fleet. Hipper's 
ships accidentally came into contact with the British 
battle cruiser fleet under Vice .Adm. David Beatty. 
Beatty drew the German High Sea Fleet toward the 
British fleet under Adm. John Jellicoe, who sailed 
between the German ships and their home port at Kiel. 

In the battle that followed, the British lost three battle 
cruisers, three armored cruisers, eight destroyers, and 
6,097 killed. Germany lost one battleship, one battle 
cruiser, four light cruisers, five destroyers, and 2,545 
killed. Germany hailed the battle as a great victory. But 
Great Britain continued to control the high seas. The 
German fleet remained almost inactive after the battle. 

The War In the Air. Both sides used airplanes for 
large-scale fighting in the battles of Verdun and the 
Somme. Air battles became common as each side tried 
to force the other from the skies. No longer did enemy 
pilots merely wave to each other as they passed. At first, 
pilots fired pistols or rifles at one another. Then their 
planes carried machine guns. Pilots who shot down five 
or more enemy aircraft were called aces (see War Ace). 
Leading aces included Manfred von Richthofen of 
Germany, Rene Fonck of France, Billy Bishop of 
Canada, Albert Ball of Great Britain, and Eddie Ricken- 
backer of the United States. Toward the end of the war, 
battles between squadrons of 10 to 50 airplanes replaced 
combat between single pilots. Before the United States 
entered the war in 191 7, some .Americans had volun- 
teered to serve in the French army as pilots. They 
formed an organization called the Escadrille Americaine, 
later the Lafayette Escadrille. 

The Germans developed dirigibles as part of their air 
forces. Beginning in 1915, they sent dirigibles and air- 
planes to boinb London. But the cigar-shaped airships 
were easy targets for fighter planes. 

The Fourth Year (1917) 

Early in 191 7, the Central Powers seemed to enjoy a 
relatively strong position. They occupied Montenegro, 
Poland, Romania, Serbia, most of Belgium, and north- 
em France. Then the L'nited States entered the war, 
and the tide began to turn in favor of the Allies. 

Baghdad and Jerusalem were captured by the British 
in 1917. These were the only major Allied gains of the 
year. A British-Indian force had landed on the Persian 
Gulf in 1915. The Turks surrounded British troops at 
Kut al-Amara, south of Baghdad. On April 29, 1916, 
the entire force of 10,000 British troops surrendered be- 
cause of threatened starvation. The surrender was a 
severe blow to British prestige. But in March, 1917, 
Baghdad fell to .Allied soldiers. In December, Maj. Gen. 
Edmund Allenby's forces marched into Jerusalem. 

The Allies Attack. In order to strengthen their posi- 
tion and save manpower, the German armies on the 
western front retreated in March, 1917, to an especially 
prepared battle line. The Germans called this line the 
Siegfried Line, and the Allies called it the Hindenburg Line. 
The Allies carried out the only offensive operations on 
the front. The year ended without any important 
changes in territor)'. In May, low morale and dissatis- 
faction caused mutinies among 16 French army corps. 



373 




Curtiss (Jenny) 




Bettmann Arrhh 



In 1917, the French executed Mata Hari, a Dutch 
dancer who had been caught spying for the Germans. 

Revolution in Russia. The Allies faced disaster on the 
eastern front. The Russians overthrew their government 
and forced Czar Nicholas II to abdicate in March. The 
Allies hailed the revolution, because they suspected that 
the Czar wanted to make peace with the Central Pow- 
ers. Russia's provisional government announced that it 
would carry on the war. Brusilov's armies advanced in 
the Carpathian Mountains. But the Germans counter- 
attacked, and advanced toward the Russian capital at 
Petrograd (now Leningrad). 

Early in November, the Bolsheviks under Lenin and 
Leon Trotsky overthrew the government of Alexander 
Kerensky and arranged for an aiTnistice with the Central 
Powers. On December 8, the new government ended 
hostilities and began peace negotiations with Germany. 
See Russian Revolution. 

Propaganda Warfare reached a new high in 191 7. 
Both sides tried to gain additional allies, or to keep other 
countries neutral. They sought to keep up the spirits of 
their own people, and to destroy the morale of the 
enemy. They spread stories of enemy atrocities, such as 
tales of soldiers cutting off children's hands. Allied 
propagandists called the Germans "Huns." German 
propaganda agents claimed that an Allied victory would 
bring ''the end of the German people." 

The Submarine Menace also reached its peak in 1917. 
In January, Germany announced that its submarines 
would sink any vessel bound into or out of any Allied 
port. It extended the war zone to cover the high seas. 
Adm. Alfred von Tirpitz, German naval commander in 
chief, hoped that unrestricted submarine warfare would 
win a quick victory before the L'nited States could 
intervene effectively on the side of the Allies. 

Both sides had frequently violated the rights of neu- 
tral ships. The British regularly seized neutral shipping 
on the high seas, claiming that it might fall into enemy 



Airplanes clashed over the battle lines and fried to sweep the 
enemy from the skies. Individual pilots fought in dogfights. Later 
battles tool&lt; place between circuses, or groups of aircraft. Pilots 
who shot down five or more aircraft were called "war aces." 

hands. Germany violated international law by sink- 
ing merchant vessels without warning. The Germans 
claimed their submarines were fragile and easy targets 
for ships' gims when on the surface. The Germans in- 
sisted that they could not risk stopping ships to check 
their papers. The Allies used depth bombs, listening 
instruments, mines, steel nets, and convoys to destroy 
or escape submarines. In March, the Germans tor- 
pedoed several American merchant ships without warn- 
ing. The next month, German submarines sank 900,000 
tons of Allied shipping, the all-time high for the war. 

The United States Enters the War. Germany's unre- 
stricted submarine warfare directly caused the United 
States to join the Allies. Only three years before, few 
Americans had thought that they would become in- 
volved in the war. The news of the outbreak of the war 
in 1 914 had astonished most Americans. President 
Woodrow Wilson had declared that the United States 
would be "neutral in fact as well as in name." 

Even after a German submarine torpedoed the Lusi- 
tania in 19 15, killing 128 Americans, Wilson thought 
the L'nited States would not enter the war. But as a 
measure of preparation, the government set up military- 
training camps for men who were willing to spend their 
vacations learning how to become soldiers. 

In June, 191 6, Congress increased the size of the 
army. Three months later, it voted more than $7,000,- 
000,000 for national defense, the largest sum appropri- 
ated up to that time. Wilson authorized L'.S. merchant 
vessels to carry g"uns as protection against submarines. 

The British intercepted a German message to Mexico 
in January, 1917, that helped persuade the United 
States to enter the war. The message indicated that 
Germany had approached Mexico for an alliance in 
case of war with the United States. As payment, Ger- 
many promised to help Mexico recover some land it 
had ceded to the United States after the Mexican War. 

A record number of sinkings of U.S. merchant ships 



374 



settled American doubts. Germany had thrust war upon 
the United States. On April 2, Wilson read a war mes- 
sage to a solemn Congress. "The world must be made 
safe for democracy," he warned. Four days later, on 
April 6, the United States declared war on Germany. 
It did not sign a treaty of alliance with other countries, 
but associated itself with the Allies. 

Life in America changed from leisure to a feverish pace 
to win the war. But the country was almost totally un- 
prepared. The government adopted a selective-service 
act that required all men between 2 1 and 30 to register 
for the draft. Its committee on public information 
sought to make the Allied cause known in almost evei-y 
city-, town, and village. "Four-minute" men promoted 
the sale of Liberty bonds and support for the draft. 
Billboards shouted slogans such as "Food Will Win the 
War." A stern-looking Uncle Sam appeared on army 
recruiting posters to announce "I Want 2"o!/." Soldiers 
and civilians alike sang "Over There" to let the world 
know that the Yanks were coming. 

Mobilizing for War. Six major wartime agencies mo- 
bilized the country's economic and industrial system 
for war. A War Industries Board under Bernard Baruch 
controlled war production. The Shipping Board tried 
to get ships built faster than the Germans could sink 
them. A Food Administration urged people in the 
country to save food. It promoted "meatless" days. A 
Rail Administration operated the railroads. A Fuel 
Administration directed the civilian uses of gasoline. 
The War Trade Board controlled exports and imports. 



WORLD WAR I 

Feelings against Germany grew stronger as the war 
progressed. Schools stopped offering courses in German 
language and literature. .Anyone who criticized the war 
effort was suspected of working for the enemy. The 
Department of Justice received wide powers to investi- 
gate espionage and sedition cases. 

Espionage. On July 30, igi6, German saboteurs set 
off an explosion at the Black Tom Island arrmiunition 
shipping station, near Jersey City, N.J. The year before, 
the chief of German espionage in the United States had 
carelessly left a briefcase in a New York elevated railway 
car. The briefcase contained secret documents with 
which the United States traced propaganda and sabo- 
tage plans to the Gemian and Austrian embassies. 

"Lafayette, We Are Here!" .American Expeditionary 
Forces under Gen. John J. Pershing began landing in 
France on June 26, 1917. Remembering that the French 
had aided the colonists in the Revolutionary War, Col. 
Charles E. Stanton, one of Pershing's staff officers, an- 
nounced: "Lafayette, we are here!" During the war, 
the government inducted more than 2,800,000 men into 
military service. The American armed forces totaled 
4,800,000 men. Nearly 1,400,000 American soldiers 
served in France. The first units entered the trenches in 
October. Pershing opposed the use of American soldiers 
as individual replacements. He insisted that they fight 
as units. These units formed the American First Army. 

The American Expeditionary Forces took part in 13 



FOUND Tire WORl D TOURS 



NOTICE! 

TnA\ KI.I.Kl.'S inteodine to 
ciiilt.irk on 111- All.tnlir I'.vupr 
jti^ rf)MiinIp&lt;l iliiil a y\n\P of 
n.ir &lt;*!(Im1h Ih'I*&lt;tii i;*&gt;rniaTiv 
iMxl lirpjiHrMini"! Oiy^.t) Britnln 
:iiit| bcr nlllPf : lli.ii ili** mnr of 
witr iiirlii(Ie» ihf n-it-r-* in(li 
Mi.t to llip Bi-iti^li !"!.-; ilial. 
hi ni'cortldiiri' «ilh fonnul tio- 
ttte piven l&gt;y tlie Imprriol Opr 
rniiii *lotfinnif*nl. \c5i-rlt&gt; M^inp 
iltp flap M (li-ciii nritnin. nr of 
liny of her «ilic«. tirs linlOe tr 
ilp-tnifllnii ill tlio^ «atcrii and 
rliat imicllrra Miillo[: i&gt;i ihc 
unr tone on hltl|i« of *lro.(i 
llnifliii or hrr iiilicn ilo -o m 
ihi-ii- own riok. 



Submorines attacked Allied ships, sometimes stopping them first. The Germans declared a war 
zone around Great Britain, and warned Americans of the danger. In 1917, they began unrestricted 
submarine warfare, sinking Allied ships anywhere. The United States then declared war on Germany. 



Bettmann Archive 




kZ^ .1^ •*-■ 






Dancing in the Streets of 

many American cities greeted 
the news ttiat the armistice end- 
ing the war had been signed. 



major operations of World War I. The Saint Mihiel 
battle of September, 1918, was the first distinctly .Ameri- 
can offensive of the war. In this operation. Brig. Gen. 
William Mitchell directed the war's largest aerial as- 
sault, with 1,481 Allied airplanes taking part. U.S. 
na\al forces in European waters helped the Allied 
fleets fight German submarines. Under the command 
of Rear Adm. William S. Sims, they also convoyed 
troops and transported war materials. 

The Final Year (1918) 

The Allies won final victory in 1918. Bulgaria, the 
Ottoman Empire, Austria-Hungary, and Germany 
signed armistices. 

The Fourteen Points. On January 8, Wilson an- 
nounced his "Fourteen Points" as the basis for a post- 
war peace settlement. The Fourteen Points included 
freedom of navigation, an end to secret diplomacy and 
trade barriers, a reduction in armaments, an adjustment 
of colonial claims, the evacuation of Central Powers 
troops from Allied countries, the re-establishment of 
Poland, the creation of an association of nations to work 
for permanent peace, independence for the subject 
peoples of Austria-Hungarv', and home rule for the non- 
Turkish parts of the Ottoman Empire. .Allied planes 
dropped thousands of copies of the Fourteen Points over 
enemy countries. The Fourteen Points gave hope to 
many enemy peoples for a just peace settlement, and 
encouraged them to overthrow their governments. 

The Last Campaigns. After a quiet winter on the 
western front, the Central Powers planned to overwhelm 
the Allied armies before the full benefit of American aid 
could arrive. Hindenburg had promised the German 
people that he would be in Paris by .April I . In March, 
German armies under Ludendorff stmck along a 50-mile 
front. The .Allies gave way slowly in some sections, but 
rapidly in others. In .April, the Allies finally formed a 
unified command. They appointed Marshal Ferdinand 
Foch as General-in-Chief of the Allied Armies in France. 

On May 3 1 , the Germans reached the banks of the 
Marne. The U.S. 4th Marine Brigade made strong at- 
tacks in Belleau Wood, on the road to Paris. It lost 
nearly 7,800 men. France later renamed the spot ''die 
Wood of the Brigade of Marines" to honor their heroic 
stand. American troops blocked an enemy offensive at 
Chateau-Thierr\', and prevented the Germans from 
sweeping across the Marne to Paris. Then Foch began 




United Press Int. 



a series of hammering blows between Reims and the 
North Sea. Five major battles raged at the same time. 
After July 1 8, the -Allied offensive never stopped until 
the armistice. On August 8, the Allies, led by Canadian 
and Australian troops, attacked the Germans fiercely at 
Amiens. A Canadian corps advanced 14,000 yards in 
one of the war's deepest advances made in a single day. 
On August 26, the Germans began retreating to the 
Hindenburg line. Ludendorff described this battle as 
"the Black Day" in the history of the German army. In 
September, the .Allies swept toward Saint Mihiel and 
the Meuse-Argonne region. American soldiers took over 
a large portion of the battle line, and helped break 
through the fortified Hindenburg line. About 1,200,000 
Americans fought in the Battle of the Meuse-.Argonne. 
About one of every ten was killed or wounded. 

The Collapse of Russia. In Februan,-, peace negotia- 
tions broke down between Germany and Russia, and 
the Germans continued their invasion. On March 3, 
Leon Trotsky signed the humiliating Treaty of Brest- 
Litovsk. By its terms, Russia gave up Finland, the 
Baltic States, Poland, and the L^kraine. Russia sur- 
rendered to Turkey the districts of Kars, Batum, and 
Ardahan south of the Caucasus Mountains. 

A few months later, Romania also made peace with 
the Central Powers. It agreed to grant oil concessions 
and give up some territory. 

In April, 1918, Allied forces landed in Madivostok, 
.Siberia, to help 60,000 Czechs and Slovaks who had 
been prisoners of war in Russia. In August, the Allies 
occupied Archangel to protect supplies there from 
Bolshevik troops. The following summer, other Allied 
soldiers landed at Murmansk to fight against the 
Bolsheviks in the Russian civil war (see Russi.^ [History]). 

The End of the Central Po&gt;vers. Austria-Hungary also 
planned a huge drive to make Italy withdraw from the 
war. But floods and resistance by Gen. Armando Diaz's 
Italian troops halted the advancing Austro-Hungarian 
armies in June. In October, Diaz launched an offensive 
to the northeast across the Piave River. He split the 
Austro-Hungarian armies in two and destroyed them. 

On .September 29, Bulgaria signed an armistice at 
Salonika. Another member of the Central Powers, the 
Ottoman Empire, signed an armistice on October 31. 
The Austro-Hungarian empire was crumbling rapidly. 
In the fall of 1918, the Hungarians, Czechs, Slovaks, 
and Poles declared their independence. On November 



37^^ 



3, representatives of Emperor Charles I agreed to an 
armistice. Germany stood alone. 

The Armistice. .Sailors in the German High Sea Fleet 
at Kiel mutinied in late October. As the news spread, 
revolts broke out in other parts of Germany. Small 
mutinies flared among German troops as food and 
munitions supplies dwindled. Hindenburg told Kaiser 
W'ilhelm II that, to avoid a catastrophe, German)' must 
seek an immediate armistice with the Allies. The Kaiser 
appointed Prince Max of Baden as Chancellor with the 
task of seeking an armistice. Prince Max appealed to 
President Wilson for armistice terms. On November 7, 
the world received a premature news stoiy that the 
Germans had signed an armistice. This has been called 
"'the false armistice." 

A German armistice delegation went to Foch's head- 
quarters near Retondes in the Forest of Compiegne on 
November 7. Foch outlined the armistice terms: the 
Germans were to (1) evacuate all occupied territory, (2) 
surrender their arms and warships, (3) withdraw all 
forces from west of the Rhine, (4) return Allied prisoners, 
and (5) permit Allied troops to occupy German territory. 
Foch gave the Germans 72 hours to accept the terms. In 
Berlin, German socialists imder Friedrich Ebert pro- 
claimed a German Republic on November 9. Kaiser 
Wilhelm abdicated and fled to neutral Netherlands. 

In a drizzling rain, the German delegates entered a 
railway car in the Compiegne Forest, and at 5 a.m. 
November 1 1 , signed the armistice. Foch signed for the 
Allies and Secretary of State Matthias Erzberger signed 
for Germany. Foch ordered fighting to stop on all battle- 
fronts at 1 1 A.M. World War I had ended. 

At the time of the armistice, .■\llied troops stood about 
120 miles from the Rhine River in northern Germany. 
The Allies established a neutral zone six miles wide 
along the east bank of the river. British and Belgian 
troops occupied a bridgehead at Cologne. Farther south, 
American Forces in Germany had headquarters at the 
Koblenz bridgehead. French occupation forces held the 
bridgehead in the Mainz area. From these three strategic 
points, the Allies commanded the Rhine valley. In 
1923, the last /Xmerican troops in Germany withdrew. 
The last Allied soldiers, French and Belgian, left in 1930. 

Results of the War 

The peace settlements after World War I healed 
many old wounds. But they also caused new ones. The 
Allies had emphasized the principle o{ self-determination, 
or the right of each nation to choose its own form of 
government. This caused the flame of nationalism to 
burn more brightly than it had before 1914. The Allies 
formed the League of Nations and a World Court as 
agencies to settle disputes peacefully. But member na- 
tions did not always support these agencies in inter- 
national disputes (see Le.^cue of Nations). 

War Losses. World War I took the lives of twice as 
many men as all major wars from 1790 to 1913 put 
together. About 63 of every 100 servicemen who died 
came from the Allied armed forces. The number of 
civilian deaths in areas of actual war totaled about 
5,000,000. Starvation, disease, and exposure accounted 
for about 80 of every 100 of these civilian deaths. Span- 
ish influenza, which some persons blamed on the war, 
caused tens of millions of other deaths. 

World War I cost more than $337,000,000,000. Of 



WORLD WAR I 

this amount, about * 186,000,000,000 paid the direct 
cost of carrying on the war. The Allies spent about two 
thirds of the money used to buy guns, food, ammuni- 
tions, and other war materials. During the first three 
years of war, the fighting nations spent more than 
S85,000 evei'y minute, and twice that amount in 1918. 
None of these figru'es includes the additional economic 
loss involved in servicemen crippled, the billions of 
dollars needed to pay interest on war debts, or the pen- 
sions paid to veterans and their families. 

About $8 of every SIO spent for the war came from 
borrowed funds. The warring countries sold bonds to 
individuals and firms. For example, the United States 
borrowed money from its citizens through Liberty Loans 
(see Liberty Loan). It also raised money by new taxes 
such as the excess-profits tax and the luxury tax. Tax 
receipts totaled about $ 1 1 ,280,000,000 inl917andl918. 
The United States loaned more than 110,000,000,000 
to the Allies (see War Debt). 

The Home Front in Europe came under intense bomb- 
ing and shelling in areas of military operations. The war 
destroyed the industrial and community lives of many 
cities, towns, and villages in these areas. It closed or 
destroyed schools, factories, roads, and railroads. In 
many countries, people had to depend on food supplied 
by their governments. Invading troops tried to change 
the lives of the people in areas they occupied. 

In eastern Europe and the Balkans, millions of persons 
fled their homes in terror of invasion. Refugees moved 
helplessly from place to place in search of food, shelter, 
and clothing. They sought shelter in the ruins of blasted 
buildings and houses. After the war, those who tried to 
return to their homes often found that their towns or 
villages no longer existed. 

During and immediately after the war, the Allies sent 
food and supplies to war-shattered countries. The L^nited 



miLi 


AKT ^AdU/ 

Total 


\Liie&gt; in 


WUKLU WA 


K 1 

Prisoners 




Casualties 


Dead 


Wounded 


or Missing 






Allies 






Belgium 


93,061 


13,716 


44,686 


34,659 


France 


6,160,800 


1,357,800 


4,266,000 


537,000 


Great 










Britain 


3,190,235 


908,371 


2,090,212 


191,652 


Greece 


27,000 


5,000 


2 1 ,000 


1,000 


Italy 


2,197,000 


650,000 


947,000 


600,000 


Japan 


1,210 


300 


907 


3 


Montenegro 


20,000 


3,000 


10,000 


7,000 


Portugal 


33,291 


7,222 


13,751 


12,318 


Romania 


535,706 


335,706 


120,000 


80,000 


Russia 


9,150,000 


1 ,700,000 


4,950,000 


2,500,000 


Serbia 


331,106 


45,000 


133,148 


152,958 


United 










States 


325,018 


116,516 


204,002 


4,500 




22,064,427 


5,142,631 


I 2,800,706 


4,121,090 




Central Powers 




Austria- 










Hungary 


7,020,000 


1,200,000 


3,620,000 


2,200,000 


Bulgaria 


266,919 


87,500 


152,390 


27,029 


Germany 


7,142,558 


1,773,700 


4,216,058 


1,152,800 


Ottoman 










Empire 


975,000 


325,000 


400,000 


250,000 



15,404,477 3,386,200 8,388,448 3,629,829 



(From estimates compiled by the U.S. War Depaitnient, Feb. 
and June 30. 1928) 



377 




FRANCE 



••^WITZER-%„ 
: ...LANDV' 



AUSTRIA. 



'OVAKI 



HUNGARY 




States supplied food, clothing, and medicine. Herbert 
Hoover directed Allied relief and reconstmclion. He 
organized the American Relief Administration to care 
for children in liberated and former enemy territory. 

Peace Aims. The peacemakers who met in Paris in 
1919 hoped to create a new and better world. But the 
Allied nations had not agreed on a common peace pro- 
gram during the war. France, Great Britain, and Italy 
did not protest against President VV'oodrow Wilson's 
Fourteen Points when he first announced them (see 
Wilson, Woodrovv [World War I|). But they did not 
officially accept them. Wilson tried to wipe out the 
grievances that had helped to bring on the war. He tried 
to ignore secret treaties, such as the London Treaty of 
1915, which followed the theory that "'to the victor 
belong the spoils." In the end, the peacemakers dis- 
regarded about half of Wilson's program. But Wilson 
hoped that the League of Nations would correct any 
injustices and mistakes in the final peace settlements. 

The Paris peace conference arranged for the evacua- 
tion of enemy troops from Allied countries and gave 
independence to the subject peoples of Austria-Hungary. 
The peacemakers took colonies away from Germany 
and provinces from Turkey, but did not adjust all colo- 
nial claims. The Allies disarmed the Central Powers. 



The German Empire 
before the war 

Austria-Hungary 
before the war 

The Russian Empire 
before the war 

Serbia 

before the war 

Montenegro 
before the war 

Boundaries 
after the war 



The Peace Treaties. The 

.'\llies signed separate peace 
treaties with Austria, Bul- 
garia, Germany, Hungary, 
and Turkey. The treaty 
with Germany was called 
Ihe Treaty of Versailles. The 
Allies signed the Treaty of 
Saint Germain with Austria 
and the Treaty of Trianon 
\sith Hungary. Bulgaria 
signed the Treaty of Neiiilly, 
and Turkey the Treaty of 
Sevres. All five treaties to- 
gether were called the Peace 
of Pans. The L'nited States 
did not ratify the Treaty of 
Versailles, but signed a sep- 
arate treaty with Germany. 
Many historians consider 
the Treaty of \'ersaillcs 
particularly harsh. The 
agreement declared that 
Germany was solely re- 
sponsible for World War I, 
and reduced Germany's 
size by one-eighth and its population by 6,500,000. 
The treaty took away all Germany's colonies and 
overseas investments, a si.xth of its farm land, an eighth 
of its livestock, and a tenth of its factories. It cut 
down Germany's merchant fleet, abolished its navy, and 
limited its army to about the size of the Belgian army. 
See Vers.mlles, TRE.^Ti' of. 

The treaties with the other Central Powers followed 
closely the one with Germany. Germany's allies had to 
limit their armaments, pay reparations, admit guilt in 
starting the war, and give written promise that they 
would treat minority groups within their borders fairly. 
Each peace treaty contained the Covenant of the 
League of Nations. It gave the League responsibility for 
enforcing the treaty provisions. The Paris conference 
created a mandate system to be administered by the 
League (sec M.\nd.\ted Territory). Many former pos- 
sessions of Germany and the Ottoman Empire became 
League mandates under one of the Allied nations. 

Changes in the World's Map. The world, particularly 
Europe, took on a new look after the war. Three 
independent countries — Austria, Czechoslovakia, and 
Hungary — emerged from the old Austro-Hungarian 
Empire, Allied diplomats made a new Poland out of 
Austrian, German, and Russian territoiy. They formed 



378 



Yugoslavia by adding to Serbia large portions of Austria- 
Hungars', Bulgaria, and Montenegro. Romania was 
doubled in size. The peace conference awarded addi- 
tional territoiy to Greece and Italy. The Ottoman Em- 
pire lost Armenia (now mostly parts of Turkey and Rus- 
sia). Palestine (now mainly in Israel). Mesopotamia (now 
Iraq), .Syria, and territorial claims in Africa. In 1917- 
1918, Estonia. Finland, Latvia, and Lithuania declared 
their independence from Russia (see Baltic States). 

A wave of republicanism swept Europe after the war. 
In 1914, only five nations had republican forms of gov- 
ernment where elected representatives governed the 
country. By 1932, this number had increased to 16. 
Germany, Austria, and the Ottoman Empire replaced 
their imperial rulers with republican governments. 

World War I and its aftermath led to the greatest 
economic depression in history during the early 1 930's. 
The consequences of the war and the problems of ad- 
justment to peace led to unrest in almost every nation. 
In some European nations, conditions allowed dictators 
to seize power (see Communism; Fascism; Nazism). 

The victorious .Mlies of World War I made no real 
effort to cooperate in enforcing the peace. They allowed 
their own military power to decline, so that they were 
unprepared for World War II. Vincent j. esposito 

Related Articles. See the History sections of World 
Book articles on the countries that took part in World 
War I. See also the following articles: 

Battle Areas 

Alsace-Lorraine Gallipoli Rijeka, or Fiume 

Balkans Peninsula .Saar 

Flanders Field Hindenburg Line Verdun, Battles 
Jutland, Battle of of 

Biographies 

ALLIED military LEADERS 

Joffre, Joseph J. C. 
Kitchener, Horatio H. 
March, Peyton C. 
Mitchell, "Billy," William 
Pershing, John J. 
Petain, Henri Philippe 
Pilsudski, Jozef 
Rickenbacker, Edward V. 



Abruzzi, Duke of the 
Albert I 
Allenby, Lord 
Beatty, David 
Byng, Julian H. G. 
Currie, Sir Arthur W. 
Foch, Ferdinand 
French, John D. P. 
Haig, Earl 
Jellicoe, Sir John R. 



Sims, William S. 
York, Alvin C. 



ALLIED civilian LEADERS 



Lloyd George, David 
Nicholas (II) of Russia 
Orlando, Vittorio E. 
Poincare, Raymond 
Venizelos, Eleutherios 
Wilson, Woodrow 



Asquith, Herbert H. 
Baker, Newton D. 
Baker, Ray S. 
Baruch, Bernard M. 
Clemenceau, Georges 
Grey, Edward 
Hoover, Herbert C. 

CENTRAL POWERS MILITARY LEADERS 

Hindenburg, Paul von Moltke(Count HelmuthJ.) 

Ludendorff, Erich F. W. von Tirpitz, .Alfred von 

CENTRAL POWERS CIVILIAN LEADERS 



Bethmann-HoUweg, 
Theobald von 



Wilhelm (II) 
Zeppelin, Count von 



Kemal Ataturk 
Lawrence, Thomas E. 



UNCLASSIFIED BIOGRAPHIES 

Cavell, Edith L. 
Constantine I 

Forces, Materials, and Weapons 
Air Force .'Mrship Army, LI.S, 

Air Force, U..S. Army 



Lenin 
Mata Hari 



Aviation 



WORLD WAR I 

Camouflage Grenade Navy, U..S. 

Chemical Warfare Machine Gun Poison Gas 

Codes and Ciphers Merchant Marine .Submarine 

Convoy Navy Tank, Military 

Organizations 

."American Legion Gold Star Mothei-s, .American 

American Legion Au.xiliary Red Cross 

Treaties 



Neuilly, Treaty of 
Rapalio, Treaties of 
Saint Germain, Treaty of 



Sevres, Treaty of 
Trianon, Treaty of 
Versailles, Treaty of 



Unclassified 

Fourteen Points Refugee Veterans Day 

League of Nations Stars and .Stripes War .Aces 
Liberty Loan Triple .Alliance War Crime 

Lusitania Triple Entente War Debt 

MandatedTerritory Unknown Soldier War Risk Insurance 
Neutrality 

Outline 

I. Causes of the War 

A. Nationalism C. Competition for Colonies 

B. Military .Alliances D. .Secret Diplomacy 
II. Men, Battlefronts, and Strategy 

A. Men LInder .Arms D. Strategy of the War 

B. War Leaders E. New Weapons 

C. Battlefronts 

ill. The War Begins (1914) 

A. Death of an .Archduke E. The Turks Enter 

B. Mobilization the War 

C. The March Through F. The War at Sea 

Belgium G. Colonies Captured 

D. The Eastern Front 
IV. The Second Year (1915) 

A. Trench Warfare D. .Action on the 

B. The Dardanelles High Seas 

C. The Italian Front E. The War in Africa 
V. The Third Year (1916) 

A. The Battle of Verdun C. On Other Fronts 

B. The Brusilov D. The Battle of Jutland 

Offensive E. The War in the Air 
VI. The Fourth Year (1917) 

A. Baghdad and Jerusalem E. The Submarine 

B. The .Allies .Attack Menace 

C. Revolution F. The United States 

in Russia Enters the War 

D. Propaganda Warfare G. "Lafayette, We Are 

Here" 
VII. The Final Year (1918) 

.A. The Fourteen Points D. The End of the 

B. The Last Campaigns Central Powers 

C. The Collapse of Russia E. The Armistice 
VIII. Results of the Wat 

.A. War Losses D. The Peace Treaties 

B. The Home Front E. Changes in the 

C. Peace Aims World's Map 

Questions 

What were four basic causes of World War I? 

When did the war officially end? 

What battle was the first turning point in the war.^ 

Where were the major battlefronts? 

What country had the most military casualties? 

What country first used poison gas in the war? What 
country first used tanks? 

What peace treaties were signed after the war? 

How many .American soldiers fought in France? 

What directly caused the United States to join the 
.Allies? 

How did the warring countries raise the money to 
pay for the war? 



379 




WORLD WAR II killed more persons, cost more money, 
damaged more properly, aflected more people, and 
probably caused more far-reaching changes than any 
other war in history. It opened the Atomic Age. and 
brought sweeping changes in warfare. Trucks sped in- 
fantrymen to the battle front after aerial bombing, giant 
tanks, and pinpoint artillery had "softened" the enemy. 
Bombers and guided missiles rained death and destruc- 
tion on soldiers, sailors, and civilians alike. Airplanes, 
warships, and ground forces worked together with split- 
second timing in amphibious attacks. Paratroops 
dropped from airplanes or landed in gliders. 

The number of people killed, wounded, or missing 
between September, 1939, and September, 1945, can 
never be calculated. More than 9,000,000 Allied service- 
men and about 6,000,000 men from the Axis countries 
died in the war. World War II cost more than all pre- 
vious wars put together. Its cost exceeded $1,150,000,- 
000.000. More than 50 countries took part in the war, 
and every nation felt its effects. 

Men fought in almost every part of the world. The 
chief battlegrounds included Asia, Europe, North Africa, 
the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, and the Mediterranean 
Sea. Troops fought in the steaming jungles of Pacific 
islands, the rolling plains of northern France, the jagged 
hills of China, and the dry deserts of Libya. 

On Sept. 1, 1939, Germany attacked Poland. Using 
blitzkrieg (lightning war), the German war machine 
crushed five countries — Denmark, Norway, Belgium, 
Luxembourg, and The Netherlands— in three months 
in 1940. Then the Germans quickly rolled over northern 
France, as Italian armies struck the country from the 
south. Hitler's attempts to overwhelm Great Britain by 
airplane bombing failed. Next his armies swept over 

380 



WORLD 

WAR 

II 



War Began on Sept. 1 , 1 939 
when German aircraft, tanks, 
and motorized troops attacked 
Poland. Many Polish cities soon 
lay devastated. By early 1942, 
all major countries of the world 
were involved in the most de- 
structive war in history. 



The Allied and Axis Coun- 
tries circled the globe in 
World War II. The Allies mobi- k 
lized about 62,000,000 men ^ 
and women. The Axis mobilized 
about half that number. 



War Ended on Sept. 2, 1945, 
less than a month after the 
Allies dropped atomic bombs on 
Hiroshimaand Nagasaki, Japan. 

United Press Int.; Wide World 





Yugoslavia and Greece and then invaded Russia. 
Japan's plans for expansion in the Far East led it to 
attack Pearl Harbor on Dec. 7, 1941, bringing the 
United States into the war. After a series of disasters, 
the Allies took the offensive. They halted .\.\is advances 
at El .^lamein in North Africa, off Midway Island in 
the Pacific, and at Stalingrad in Russia. The .'Mlies 
invaded the Pacific island of Guadalcanal in the first 
of many amphibious invasions that brought them to 
Japan's doorstep. In Europe. -Allied armies landed in 
Italy and France, then swept into Germany itself Italy 
surrendered on .Sept. 3. 1943. Germany on May 7. 1945. 
and Japan on .Sept. 2. 194.T. An uneasy peace, more like 
a cease-fire, returned to a war-weary world. 

The .Allies called the conflict "a war for survival." 
Even before the guns were stilled, a new threat to world 
peace began arising on the ashes of .Axis defeat. Russia 
sought to impose commimist dictatorships on free 
nations in all parts of the world. The atonlic bomb and 
the guided missile, which appeared toward the end of 
the war, served notice that any future world war would 
be even more destructive than World War II. 

Causes of Conflict 

The three main causes of World War II were: (1) the 
problems left unsolved b\' World War I. (2) the rise of 
dictatorships, and (3) the desire of Germany, Italy, and 
Japan for more territory. 

Historians do not agree on the exact date when 
\V'orld W'ar II began. Many consider the German in- 
vasion of Poland on .Sept. 1, 1939, as the beginning of 
the war. Some say that it started when the Japanese 
invaded Manchuria on Sept. 18, 1931. Others even 
regard World Wars I and II as parts of the same con- 
flict, with only a breathing spell between. 

The world did not enjoy total peace from 1918 to 
1939. These years are sometimes called a period of 
armed truce. Acts of aggression and "little wars" flared 
during this period, and dictators seized power in Russia, 
Italy, Germany. Japan, and Spain. 

Problems LeH by World War I 
The Versailles Treaty. Many historians trace the 



THE ALLIES 



.Argentina (Mar. 27, 194;")) 
.\ustralia (Sept. 3, 1939) 
Belgium (May 10, 1940) 
Bolivia (.Apr. 7, 1943) 
Brazil (.Aug. 22, 1942) 
Canada (.Sept. 10, 1939) 
Chile (.Apr. 11, 1945) 
China (Dec. 8, 1941) 
Colombia (.Nov. 26, 1943) 
Costa Rica (Dec. 8, 1941) 
Cuba (Dec. 9, 1941) 
Czechoslovakia 

(Dec. 16, 1941) 
Denmark (.Apr. 9, 1940) 
Dominican Republic 

(Dec. 8, 1941) 
Ecuador (Feb. 2, 1945) 
Egypt (Feb. 24, 1945) 
El Salvador (Dec. 8, 1941) 
Ethiopia (Dec. 14, 1942) 
France (Sept. 3, 1939) 
Great Britain 

(Sept. 3, 1939) 
Greece (Oct. 28, 1940) 
Guatemala (Dec. 9, 1941) 
Haiti (Dec. 8, 1941) 



Honduras (Dec. », 1941) 
India (Sept. 3, 1939) 
Iran (.Aug. 25, 1941) 
Iraq (Jan. 17. 1943) 
Lebanon (Feb. 27, 1945) 
Liberia (Jan. 27, 1944) 
Lu.xembourg (May 10, 1940) 
Mexico (Mav 22, 1942) 
Netherlands (May 10. 1940) 
New Zealand (Sept. 3, 1939) 
Nicaragua (Dec. 11, 1941) 
Norway (.Apr. 9, 1940) 
Panama (Dec. 7, 1941) 
Paraguay (Feb. 7, 1945) 
Peru (Feb. 12, 1945) 
Poland (Sept. 1, 1939) 
Russia (June 22, 1941) 
San Marino (.Sept. 21, 1944) 
Saudi Arabia (Mar. 1, 1945) 
South .Africa (Sept. 6, 1939) 
Syria (June 8, 1941) 
Turkey (Feb. 23, 1945) 
United States (Dec. 7, 1941) 
Uruguay (Feb. 15, 1945) 
Venezuela (Feb. 15, 1945) 
Yugoslavia (.Apr. 6, 1941) 



THE AXIS 



Bulgaria (Mar. I, 1941) Italy (June 10, 1940) 
Finland (June 25, 1941) Japan (Dec. 7, 1941) 
Germany (Sept. 1, 1939) Romania (Nov. 23, 1940) 
Hungary (Nov. 20, 1940) 
Dates Are Those on Which Each Country Entered the War. 

roots of World War II to the Treat)' of N'ersailles and 
other peace settlements that followed World War I. The 
victorious .Allies occupied Germany. They forced it to 
disarm, give up land, pay reparations, and admit its 
guilt in starting the war (see \'ers.\illes, TRE.^Ti' of). 
Germany suffered from widespread unemployment, run- 
away currency inflation, and lack of government leader- 
ship. The countr)' lay devastated. The German people 

381 



WORLD WAR II 

found it easy to blame the Versailles Treaty for their 
troubles. They called it the Versailles Dictate. Germany 
set up a republican form of government at Weimar in 
igig. But many Germans blamed the new government 
for accepting the hated treaty. Workers who could not 
find jobs drifted into the Communist and National 
Socialist parties. They loudly demanded revision of the 
treaty and an overthrow of the Weimar republic. 

The League of Nations was set up by the treaties 
that ended World War I. The heads of member states 
wanted the League to help nations settle their disputes 
peacefully. But the League had no international police 
force that could snuff out sparks of war. It did settle 
some arguments. In 1925, Germany became a member 
of the League. But the United States did not join the 
League, and the organization gradually grew weaker 
each year (see League of Nations). 

Most countries of western Europe were too occupied 
with their own problems to pay much attention to Ger- 
many, although its officials pleaded for help. The 
German people decided that their government could do 
nothing to help them. This general discontent, and the 
worldwide depression that began in 1929, hastened the 
death of the republic. As the government lost power, 
Adolf Hitler and his National Socialist, or Nazi, party 
grew stronger (see Hitler, Adolf; Nazism). 

Attempts at Disarmament. The Allies disarmed 
Germany after World War I, and promised to work for 
general disarmament. In 1921, the Washington Naval 
Conference agreed to limit the number and size of major 
warships of the leading naval powers. For e.xample, the 
United States scrapped 28 battleships and 6 battle 
cruisers. But the conference did nothing about general 
disarmament. Many countries held discussions, but 
none took any positive steps. 

The League of Nations called a conference of 60 
nations at Geneva, Switzerland, in 1932. Chancellor 
Heinrich Briining of Germany announced that his 
country would be willing to stay at the armament level 
set by the Versailles Treaty if other countries would 
reduce their armaments to that level. But France refused 
to disarm until an international police system could be 
established. The Geneva conference ended in failure. 
Some historians call this setback the turning point that 
headed Europe toward World War II. Briining's gov- 
ernment collapsed. Within six months, Hitler became 
chancellor of Germany. Almost immediately, he with- 
drew Germany from the conference and the League of 
Nations. See Disarmament. 

Economic Problems were among the fundamental 
causes of World War II. Germany, Italy, and Japan 
considered themselves unjustly handicapped in trying 
to compete with other nations for markets, raw materi- 
als, and colonies. They believed that such countries as 
Belgium, France, Great Britain, The Netherlands, and 
the United States unfairly controlled most of the world's 
wealth and people. In prosperous times, Germany, 
Italy, and Japan could find markets for their products. 
But these markets were closed in times of economic 
depression. Other governments put high tariffs and low 
quotas on imports. So Germany, Italy, and Japan 
looked for lands to conquer in order to get what they con- 
sidered their share of the world's resources and markets. 

382 



The problem of war debts and reparations troubled 
many countries during this period. In World War I, the 
Allied nations had borrowed from each other to finance 
the war. Some countries began demanding that these 
loans be repaid (see War Debt). Germany and the other 
defeated countries had to pay reparations for damages 
they caused during the war. The Allies demanded 
$33,000,000,000 in reparations from Germany alone. 

Nationalism hindered international cooperation be- 
fore World War II as it had before World War I. For a 
time during the 1920's, it appeared that international 
cooperation might reduce national rivalries. But, with 
the depression of 1929, nations again became concerned 
chiefly with solving only their own problems, instead of 
cooperating with their neighbors. Each sought security 
for itself in the form of rearmament and alliances. 

Some countries faced additional problems of national- 
ism from the minorities within their borders. For example, 
a number of German-speaking citizens lived in the 
Sudetes Mountains region of Czechoslovakia. Some 
Sudeten Germans had left Germany to escape the grow- 
ing tyranny there. Others demanded the right to be 
govemed by Germany or have their own government. 

The Rise of Dictatorships 

Many countries had liberal, democratic governments 
after World War I. But dictatorships developed during 
the 1920's and 1930's, and destroyed democratic rights. 
Totalitarian governments found fertile fields for growth 
in Russia, Italy, Germany, Japan, and Spain (see 
Government [A Comparison of Democracy and Dicta- 
torship]). 

Communism in Russia came to power in the revolu- 
tion of November, 1917 (see Communism). The Com- 
munists under Lenin promised a "dictatorship of the 
proletariat," or working people. But they set up a one- 
man dictatorship instead. First Lenin and then Joseph 
Stalin ruled Russia. The government seized all land, 
factories, and private property. It outlawed all political 
parties except its own, the Communist party. 

Fascism in Italy. Benito Mussolini founded the Fascist 
party in 1919 (see Fascism; Mussolini, Benito). After 
he became prime minister of Italy in 1922, he quickly 
seized all powers of government and transformed the 
country into a totalitarian state. During the peace settle- 
ments of World War I, many Italians had blamed the 
liberal government for not pressing Italy's claims to 
more land. The country faced inflation and a huge 
public debt. Mussolini promised to restore Italy to its 
ancient greatness, when Rome was the center of a 
mighty empire. 

Nazism in Germany. The National Socialist, or 
.\az.i, party came to power in 1933. Adolf Hitler had 
clearly revealed his plans in 1925 in his book Mein 
KampJ. He urged the use of armed force to remove the 
restrictions of the Versailles treaty. In a program his 
party adopted in 1920, he called for rearmament and a 
union of all German-speaking peoples into a "Greater 
Germany." See Nazism. 

As soon as Hitler became chancellor of Germany, he 
crushed all political opposition and started to rebuild 
Germany's armed strength. German schools, from 
kindergarten up, began teaching children the glories of 
military might. Boys and girls were required to join 
Hitler Youth groups, which stressed military discipline. 



Militarism in Japan had long been part of the coun- 
try's traditions. The people held the samurai, or warrior 
class, in the highest regard. War and conquests, accord- 
ing to the Japanese militarists, were the highest achieve- 
ments of man. Japan had a liberal government for a 
brief period during the 1920's. But by 1931 the mili- 
tarists again won control of the government and set up 
a military dictatorship. They revived as a national 
slogan Hakko Ichiu, or Bringing the Eight Corners of the 
World Under One Roof. Japan's military leaders strength- 
ened their power by invading Manchuria on Sept. 18, 
1931 . Many historians consider this act the real start of 
World War II, because aggression was not halted. 

Aggression on the March 

Manchuria. The Japanese found Manchuria a par- 
ticularly inviting goal because of its abundant natural 
resources and fine ports. If Japan had these ports, it 
could control all northern China. After Japan had estab- 
lished its leadership in China, it could expand elsewhere. 

The Japanese struck at a time when most countries 
were more concerned with the depression than with an 
invasion in far-off China. The League of Nations did 
nothing but condemn Japan formally. The United 
States introduced the doctrine of nonrecognition, simply 
declaring that it would not recognize Japan's conquest. 

China. The Japanese invaded China near .Shanghai 
in 1932, but later withdrew. Then they began an eco- 
nomic campaign against Chinese commerce. Fighting 
broke out on July 7, 1937, after the Japanese staged an 
"incident" near Peiping. The "undeclared war" be- 
tween Japan and China quickly spread to most of 
China. By December, 1 938, the Japanese had conquered 
Hankow and Canton. They controlled many of China's 
major ports and cities, e.xcept for Chungking, the war- 
time Chinese capital. Japan imposed an economic 
blockade on China. Some countries gave a little aid and 
sympathy to China, but most nations continued to sell 
war supplies to Japan. 

Ethiopia. In 1935, Mussolini's troops swept into 
Ethiopia. The Italians slaughtered the crudely-equipped 
and poorly-trained Ethiopian forces. In 1936, they com- 
pleted the conquest of the country (see Ethiopia 
[History]). The League of Nations voted economic sanc- 
tions against Italy, but later withdrew them. 

The Spanish Civil War broke out in 1936. Both 
Mussolini and Hitler sent men and supplies to help the 
rebel forces of Francisco Franco. Russia gave aid to the 
Spanish Loyalists. Franco overthrew the Spanish gov- 
ernment and in 1939 organized an absolute dictatorship 
similar to the ones in Germany and Italy (see Spain [The 
Spanish Republic]). Historians often call the war in 
Spain "the testing ground of World War II," because 
the Germans, Italians, and Russians tested some weap- 
ons and military tactics there. 

The Rhinelond. In 1935, Hitler established military 
conscription for all German men, created an air force, 
and began to build submarines. The Treaty of Versailles 
limited Germany to a 100,000-man army, but Hitler 
soon had 600,000 men under arms. Some European 
governments protested these violations of the treaty. But 
Great Britain agreed to scrap the limitations of the 
Versailles Treaty and to allow Germany to build an air 
force and navy. 

In another violation of the treaty. Hitler sent troops 



WORLD WAR II 

into demilitarized districts west of the Rhine River in 
March, 1936. This act brought German soldiers to the 
French border. Some French leaders wanted to send 
troops to force the Germans back. But such an act 
might have led to total war, and Europe shrank from 
the risk. So Hitler won again. 

Late in 1936, Germany recognized Italy's conquest 
of Ethiopia. It joined Italy and Japan in signing an 
anti-Comintern pact to oppose Communism (see Com- 
intern). The three countries became allied in what was 
known as the Rome-Berlin-Tokyo Axis (see Axis). They 
signed a military-aid pact in 1940. 

Austria. Confident of success. Hitler turned to his 
next objective: uniting Austria with Germany. The 
peace settlements of 1919 had forbidden such a union. 
Hitler falsely claimed that Germany "has neither the 
wish nor intention ... to annex or unite with Austria." 
But his actions soon showed his real intentions. He 
secretly encouraged and supported a revolutionary Nazi 
movement in Austria. Nazi conspirators assassinated 
Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuss of Austria, who had 
opposed German efforts to seize his country. In March, 
1 938, German troops marched triumphantly into Austria. 

Czechoslovalcia. Hitler's swift and bloodless conquest 
of Austria frightened Czechoslovakia. The Germans 
now faced the Czechs on three sides. Within the country 
lived 3,500,000 Sudeten Germans. Many had joined a 
pro-German party that took orders from Hitler. 

Hitler demanded that the Sudeten Germans be placed 
under his rule. But the Czechs stood ready to fight. 
France vowed to stand by its treaty obligations to the 
Czechs. Russia also gave assurances. Britain pledged to 
support France. With Europe on the brink of war. Hitler 
promised that the Sudetenland was "the last territorial 
claim I have to make in Europe." Chamberlain and 
Premier Edouard Daladier of France conferred with 
Hitler and Mussolini in Munich. The Germans did not 
allow Czech representatives to attend the conference. 
Chamberlain and Daladier finally gave in to the de- 
mands of the two dictators. LInder the Munich agree- 
ment of Sept. 29, 1938, Czechoslovakia lost the Sudeten- 
land to Germany. When Chamberlain returned to 
London, he said the pact meant "peace for our time." 
See Munich Agreement. 

Poland. Hitler then made another "last claim" in 
violation of his promise. He secretly ordered Poland to 
hand over a strip of territory across the Polish Corridor 
to link Germany proper with East Prussia. He also 
wanted to unite Danzig with Germany (see Danzig; 
Polish Corridor). 

In March, 1 939, Hitler's army occupied the remain- 
der of Czechoslovakia. Next, he seized Memel from 
Lithuania. In April, Italy occupied Albania. 

In the west, the Germans worked at frantic speed to 
complete the Siegfried Line fortifications opposite the 
French Maginot Line (see Maginot Line; Siegfried 
Line). Hitler's broken promises finally convinced Great 
Britain and France that he intended to conquer all 
eastern Europe. The policy of giving in had proved to 
be a complete failure. When Hitler again demanded 
Danzig and a pathway across the Polish Corridor, 
Chamberlain announced that Great Britain would sup- 
port Poland if it resisted a German attack. 



EUROPEAN 
THEATER 



ri i 



': I 

it 
w 
■.\ 
.•• \ 
• I 



FINLAND ■•. 



3 



SWEDEN 



ATLANTIC 
OCEAN 



W Battle of the Atlantic 
Sept., I939.May, 194S 



#&gt;■ 



'^ Norway .' 
Apr. 9-June 9, 1940\ 



\ ^ 



iRWAY 



BALTIC 
SEA 



^^A 



GREAT 
BRITAIN 

V-Weapons Attacks 
June 13, 1944-Mar. 2], 1945 



NORTH ."TVi".. ^ 
SEA *■"• '' "*' 

DENMARK 



Leningrad 
Jon. 21-27, 1944 



"r^ 



The Netherlands 
May 10-15, 1940 

■H. 

THE 
NETHERLANDS .•'• 



Danzig 



■■■■&gt;&lt;S&gt; 



J' EAST-.../ 

T PRUSSIA : 



Moscow 
V* 
\ 
/ 



BELGIUM- -JV.ii.i.r.^ 

Battle of-^ ..:Belg.uni 



GERMANY 
A. 
• Berlin 



7^ Warsaw . 



May 10-27, 1940 



^^ . London 

Bottle of Britain ^ 

July 10, 1940-Oct., 1940 

Normandy Invaded ^•he Bulge •■••::&gt;^'""y 10-2/, 

June 6, 1944 ""• """i "" ^■•""i'""?„ ,„ J. czec„o„ •••. .. POLAND 

..• Surrender ■;'"'"1' "&gt;' """.-•...•^^OvVm ••.. 
""* at Reims / Apr. 13, 1945 Vienna* '; .•— •. 

^Moy?, 1945.--. ■•. ■'■■■■■■•'it '\-- ■■■/'"'■ 

SWITZERLAND •■'" AUSTRIA; 7 Budapest 

•. .-.. .— •■ •. •: HUNGARY." Feb. 13, 1945 



, , Jon. 11, 1945: 
Apr.22-May2,1945^p,,„„j 

"■;Sept. 1-28, 1939 

f 



^ 



&gt; 



France 



/ 
U S S I , A 



\ 

Russia Invaded ~ ^ 

June 22, 1941 ^ 

Stalingrad */ 
Nov. 19, 1942-Feb. 2, 1943 / 

\ 



\ 



PORTUGAL; 



June 5-22, 1940 

FRANC ,V'^'' 

Southern France 

Invaded 
Aug. 15, 1944 



'^Xj' Yugoslavia ■'. 



ROMANIA 



# Italy 



ilpr. 6-18, 1941 ■•: ^ . , ^ 

Sevastopol • 



y^ 



^ug, 



. Sept. 3, 1943- 

Rome • 



SPAIN 



MEDITERRANEAN 
SEA 



May 2, 1945 

4.% 



*" Sicily 
July 10-Aug. 17, 1943 



.-^h^ .-BULGARIA 

ALBANIA-;.... .":•...■•... ...•"■ 

': GREECE '■' 
■V^ Greece 
Oct. 28, 1940- 
Apr. 27, 1941 



Nov. 1, 1941-July 1, 1942 
BLACK SEA 



U R K 





.: " ( TUNISIA 

North Africa 
Nov. 7-8, 1942-May 12, 1943 • ;■" J/v 



ALGERIA 



THE WAR AGAINST GERMANY AND ITALY 
^Axis Victory "^Allied Victory 



(- 



) Extent of battle lines 



Tobruk 
June 18-21, 1942 

'. El Alomein V 
Oct. 23-Nov;3, 1942^ ^ 

(Italian tenitory) \ \ 

\\ 



I B 



EGYPT 



SAUDI ARABIA 



RED 
SEA 



\ 



HIGHLIGHTS OF THE WAR IN EUROPE AND AFRICA 



Sept. 
Sept. 


1 
3 


Nov, 


30 


Apr. 
May 


9 
10 


June 


10 


June 


22 


Aug. 
Oct. 


4 
28 


Nov. 


20 


Nov. 


23 


Jan. 


15 


Mar. 


1 


Apr. 
Aug. 
June 


6 

14 

22 


1,1 


7 
11 


June 


5 


June 


21 


July 


2 


Sept. 


16 


Oct. 


23 


Nov. 


7-8 


Nov. 


U 


Nov. 


12 


Nov. 


19 


Nov. 


27 


Feb. 


2 


May 
May 

July 

Sept 
Sept 


7 

12 
10 
3 
3 


Oct. 


13 


Nov 


6 


Jan. 


27 


Mar 


19 


June 


6 


June 


13 


July 

Aug 
Aug 
Sept 
Sept 
Dec. 


25 
15 
25 
5 

. 10 
16 


Dec. 


27 


Jan. 


11 


Jan. 


21 


Feb. 


13 


Apr 
Apr 
Apr 
May 
May 
May 
July 


13 

22 

25 

2 

2 

7 

26 



1939 

German troops invaded Poland. 
Britain and France declared war on Ger- 
many. 
Russian troops invaded Finland. 

1940 
Germany attacked Denmark and Norway. 
Germany invaded Belgium, Luxembourg, 

and The Netherlands. 
Italy declared war on Britain and France. 
France surrendered to Germany. 
Italy invaded British Somaliland. 
Italian troops swept into Greece. 
Hungary joined the A.xis. 
Romania joined the Axis. 

1941 
British soldiers invaded Ethiopia. 
Bulgaria joined the Axis. 
Germany invaded Greece and Yugoslavia. 
The Atlantic Charter was announced. 
Axis forces invaded Russia. 
United States troops landed in Iceland. 
Germany and Italy declared war on the 
United States. The United States de- 
clared war on Germany and Italy. 
1942 
The United States declared war on Bul- 
garia, Hungary, and Romania. 
German troops seized Tobruk in North 

Africa. 
The British halted the Germans at El 

Alamein. 
German forces entered Stalingrad (now 

Volgograd) in Russia. 
The British began an offensive at El Ala- 
mein. 
Allied forces landed in North Africa. 
French resistance in North Africa ended. 
British troops captured Tobruk. 
The Russians counterattacked at Stalingrad. 
The French scuttled their fleet at Toulon. 

1943 
The last Germans at Stalingrad surren- 
dered. 
Tunis and Bizerte fell to the Allies. 
Organized Axis resistance in Africa ended. 
Allied forces invaded Sicily. 
The Allies landed in Italy. 
Italy signed a secret armistice with the 

Allies. 
Italy declared war on Germany. 
The Russians recaptured Kiev. 

1944 
The Russians broke the siege of Leningrad. 
German troops swept into Hungary. 
The Allies landed in Normandy, France. 
The first V-1 rocket fell on London. 
LInited States forces broke out of Normandy. 
Allied troops landed in southern France. 
Romania declared war on Germany. 
Bulgaria declared war on Germany. 
Finland signed an armistice with Russia. 
The Germans began the Battle of the Bulge. 
The Allies halted the German offensive. 

1945 
Russian soldiers entered Warsaw, Poland. 
Hungary declared war on Germany. 
Russian forces occupied Budapest. 
Vienna fell to invading Russian troops. 
The Russians reached the suburbs of Berlin. 
U.S. and Russian forces met at Torgau. 
German troops in Italy surrendered. 
Berlin surrendered to Russian troops. 
Germany surrendered to the .•\llies. 
The .■\llies issued the Potsdam Declaration. 




Axis Empire ot its Height (September, 1942) extended 
from Norway to North Africa and France to western Russia. 




r 



/ 




Normandy Invaded (June, 1 944). The Allies piercea 
Germany's Fortress Europe with an amphibious attack. 





" ' ^^^BBtP!H|BBB|^Bft; - -.-^ 


h 


gf ^^ixi^^ f 


i- 


:Xi r 
1© 




'^■^ii 






_^ 


Surrender of Germany (May, 1945) ended fighting in 
Europe. The Allies then freed German-held Norway. 





WORLD WAR II 

Hitler complained that Chamberlain's guarantees to 
Poland encouraged the Poles to be "unreasonable." 
German newspapers screamed about the "frightful mal- 
treatment" of the German-speaking peoples in Poland. 
Hitler renounced a treaty of friendship with Poland. 
Conflict between the Germans and the Poles in Danzig 
increased. Tension grew as rimiors of war filled the air. 

Prelude to War. Early in the spring of 1939, Hitler 
decided definitely to attack Poland in September. His 
high command prepared plans for the invasion under 
the code name of Case White. The Biitish and French 
had been negotiating with the Russians to gain support 
for the Poles. At the same time, Russia was negotiating 



with Germany for better commercial and trade relations. 

Some historians believe that Russia knew in the spring 
or early summer of 1939 that Germany planned to in- 
vade Poland in Septeinber. Knowing this. Russia signed 
a nonaggression pact with Germany on August 23. The 
Russians promised to remain neutral in case Germany 
went to war. They also made a secret agreement to 
divide Poland \\ith the Germans after the conquest. 

Hitler assumed that Great Britain and France would 
not go to war to support Poland. At dawn on Sept. 1, 
1939, German troops smashed into the country. Britain 
and France at once ordered Hitler to withdraw his 
forces, warning that they would go to war if he refused. 
Hitler paid no attention. On .September 3, Britain and 
France declared vsar on Germany. 



Men and Strategy 



As in World War I, Great Britain, France, and the 
47 countries siding with them became known as the 
Allies. Germany and its si.x allies were known as the 
Axis. At the beginning of the war, the Axis nations had 
the advantages. They had trained more powerful armed 
forces than the Allies. Thex- had organized their fac- 
tories to produce war materials. But after the war became 
a truly global conflict in 1941, the .Mlies cooperated to 
outfight the .^xis on the battlefields and to outproduce 
them in the factories. 

Wartime Leaders 

The Allies. The heads of government of China, 
Great Britain, Russia, and the United States became 
known as the Btg Four. Two of the Big Four powers had 
the same heads of government throughout the war. 
Chiang Kai-shek ruled China, and Joseph Stalin 
directed Russia's war eflbrts. In Great Britain, Winston 
S. Churchill replaced Neville Chamberlain as prime 
minister in 1940, and Clement R. Attlee succeeded 
Churchill in July, 1945. Franklin D. Roosevelt was re- 
elected President of the United States in November, 
1944, but died in .^pril, 1945. Vice-President Harr\- S. 
Truman succeeded him. During the war, the Big Four 
leaders conferred several times. Churchill met with 
Roosevelt in Washington. D.C., Clasablanca, Malta, 
and Quebec. The two conferred with Chiang Kai-shek 
in Cairo, and with Stalin at Tehran and Yalta. Churchill 
and Attlee met with Stalin and Truman at Potsdam. 

After 1942, Great Britain and the United States 
worked out the broad strategic outlines of the war 
through the Combined Chiefs of Staff. This group in- 
cluded the United Stales Joint Chiefs of Staff and the 
British Chiefs of .Staff Committee. Officers who served 
on it during most of the war included Generals of the 
Army George C. Marshall and Henry H. Arnold, and 
Fleet Admirals William D. Leahy and Ernest J. King 
of the United States; and Field NIarshals Sir John G. 
Dill and Sir Alan F. Brooke, Marshal of the Royal Air 
Force Sir Charles Portal, and Admirals of the Fleet Sir 
Dudley Pound and Sir Andrew B. Cunningham of 
Great Britain. 

The principal -Allied battle commanders included 
Field Marshals Sir Harold Alexander and Henry M. 
Wilson in the Mediterranean, General of the Army 
Dwight D. Eisenhower in North Africa and Europe. 
General of the Army Douglas MacArthur in the South- 



west Pacific, Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten in 
Southeast Asia, and Fleet Adiniral Chester W. Nimitz 
in the Central Pacific. Chiang Kai shek and Stalin had 
the titles of Generalissiino of military forces. 

The Axis. .Xmong the three chief Axis powers, only 
Emperor Hirohito of Japan ruled throughout the war. 
Japan had several premiers, including Fumimaro Ko- 
noye. Mitsumasa Yonai. Hideki Tojo. and Kuniaki 
Koiso. X'ictor Emmanuel retained the Italian throne 
during the war, but the real head of the government, 
Benito Mussolini, resigned in 1943. .Adolf Hitler, the 
German chancellor, committed suicide in .April. 1945. 

The chief Axis field commanders included German 
Field Marshals Karl Gerd von Rundstedt, Albert 
Kesselring, and Erwin Rommel; Marshal Rodolfo 
Graziani of Italy; and General I'omobumi Yamashita 
and Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto of Japan. 

Strategy of the War 

Global Warfare. Historians have found no evidence 
that Germany, Italy, and Japan had any formal joint 
strategic plans for winning World War II. Germany 
intended to build up a powerful empire by occupying 
territory to the east and south. Then, after overrunning 
France, it expected to conquer the British Isles by air 
assaults. AfteiAvards, German troops would defeat 
Russia, capture the Caucasus oilfields, and unite with 
Italian armies advancing from Africa and Japanese 
armies moving westward in Asia. Italy hoped to take 
advantage of German successes to giab tenitory for itself. 

Japan intended to destroy the L'nited .States Pacific 
Fleet at Pearl Harbor, then quickly overrun Thailand, 
Malaya, the Philippines, and the Netherlands East 
Indies. Then it hoped to complete its conquest of China. 
Japan expected the Allies eventually to take the offen- 
sive. But it also expected that fighting a two-ocean war 
would exhaust the Allies and make them willing to 
negotiate peace, letting Japan keep the territories it had 
seized. Japan had no plans for invading the United 
.States mainland. 

"Germany First." Fhe .Mlies agiced upon basic 
strategy once the war began. Roosevelt and Churchill at 
their first wartime conference, in December. 1941. 
decided to concentrate on Germany first and then on 
Japan. They considered Germany the greater and closer 
enemy. The Allies planned to invade western Europe to 
relieve German pressure on the Russians. Driving east- 



386 




WAR LEADERS 



Allied "Big Three" were 

Britain's W inston Churchill, 
Franklin D. Roosevelt of the 
United States, ond Russia's 
Joseph Stalin. 



Axis Leaders Adolf Hitler of 
Germany and Benito Mussolini 
of Italy failed to win their dream 
of a great world empire. 



Wide \\'orl(I: Uniletl Press Int. 



ward. Allied armies would crush Germany against the 
Russian forces rolling westward. The Allies planned to 
knock Italy out of the war b\- invading it from North 
African bases. 

In order to defeat Japan, the Allies planned to seize 
key Pacific islands and to build bomber bases in China. 
Using China and the Pacific islands as springboards, the 
.Mlies could then invade Japan. 

Mobilization 

When war began in 1939, Germany had the advan- 
tage of being substantially mobilized. It had already 
organized its industrial plants for wartime needs. The 
Allies, after war broke out, had to draft and train men 
for the armed forces, transform factories and plants for 
war production, and adopt strategic plans. 

Hitler had a well-balanced tcehnnatht, or armed force, 
of 106 combat divisions, with powerful tanks, motorized 
vehicles, and heavy artillery. Great Britain, France, and 
Poland had greater reserves of manpower. But their 
armies were not so well trained and equipped as those of 
the Germans. Germany had about 12,000 military air- 
craft, compared to about 8.000 for the .Allies. The Allies 
had larger navies, with about five tons of ships to every 
one for the Germans. But the .Mlies also had to patrol 
wide areas of the world, and Germany could restrict its 
fleet activities to the North Sea and the nearby Atlantic. 
In addition. German submarines seriously threatened 
Allied vessels carrying troops and war materials. 

From the time Germany attacked Poland until Japan 
surrendered six years later, the A.xis mobilized about 
30,000,000 men and women in their armed forces. The 
Allies mobilized about 62,000,000 men and women. 

Early Stages of the War 

The overwhelming power of the Axis won a series of 
major conquests during the first two years of war. In 
turn, Poland, Denmark, Luxembourg, The Nether- 
lands, Belgium, Norway, France, Yugoslavia, and 
Greece fell before the ,\xis war machine. Germany 
gained active allies in Italy, Hungary, Romania, and 
Bulgaria. The Germans tried to bomb Britain into sur- 




render, but failed. German armies then invaded Russia. 
Blilzl&lt;rieg 

Poland Crushed. The German high command planned 
the Polish campaign with great care. It pioneered a new 
method of warfare called blitzkrieg, or lightning war. On 
Sept. I, 1939, German Stuka dive bombers attacked 
Polish troops, and heavier bombers struck at fortifica- 
tions and industrial plants. On the ground, tanks and 
infantry raced through the Polish lines. The British and 
French could not give direct help to the Poles. 

In August, Germany and Russia had agreed secretly 
to divide Poland. On September 17, with the Polish 
armies ready to collapse, Russian armies invaded east- 
ern Poland against little opposition. The Russians 
claimed that the&gt;- wanted to "protect their own fron- 
tiers." Most Polish resistance ended within three days. 



WORLD WAR II 

But the people of Warsaw fought on. Without food and 
suppHes, the city had to surrender on September 27. 
Two days later, Germany and Russia divided Poland. 

For seven months after the Polish campaign of 1939, 
the Germans and the Allies fought no important land 
battles. The French dug in behind the Maginot Line, 
and the Germans sat behind their Siegfried Line, await- 
ing the next order to attack. Each side conducted small 
raids, took aerial photographs, and dropped propa- 
ganda leaflets. Newspapers called the war in the west 
the phony war. But on the Atlantic Ocean the German 
pocket battleships Admiral Graf Spee and Deutschland 
raided Allied convoys. 

Denmark and Norway had excellent bases from which 
submarines could operate in the North Sea. Ships carry- 
ing Swedish iron ore to Germany steamed through these 
waters. Both sides had plans to occupy Norway. But the 
Germans acted first. They decided to invade Denmark 
in order to make an invasion of Norway easier. At dawn 
on April 9, German warships carr&gt;'ing troops slipped 
into Copenhagen, Denmark, and into Bergen, Oslo, and 
other coastal cities in Norway. Denmark surrendered 
almost immediately. German troops seized airfields at 
Oslo and near Stavanger. A Norwegian "fifth column" 
of spies, led by Vidkun Quisling, helped the Germans. 
Quisling became head of the puppet government in 
Norway. 

After the first shock of the invasion, the Norwegians 
began to fight back. Great Britain and France sent 
troops to Norway, but could not furnish adequate air 
support. The Germans gained strength, particularly in 
airpower, and finally drove the Allied forces from Nor- 
way in June. The British navy meanwhile inflicted 
heavy losses on German warships. 

As a result of this British defeat, Winston S. Churchill 
succeeded Neville Chamberlain as British prime minister 
in May, 1 940. Churchill told his people that he could 
offer them nothing but "blood, toil, tears, and sweat." 

Retreat to Dunkerque. Hitler next unleashed his terri- 
fying war machine in western Europe. On May 10, 1940, 
German troops plunged into Belgium, Luxembourg, 
and The Netherlands. Generals Fedor von Bock, Wil- 
helm von Leeb, and Karl Gerd von Rundstedt com- 
manded the three invading army groups. The Allies 
thought the Germans would use the same maneuver 
that they tried in World War L Instead, armored units, 
paratroops, and dive bombers struck at Luxembourg 
and the heavily wooded Ardennes Forest. The Germans 
raced to the coast and isolated the Allied forces in Bel- 
gium from the main body in France. Luxembourg fell in 
one day, and The Netherlands in five days. On May 19, 
Gen. Ma-xime Weygand of France replaced Gen. Mau- 
rice Gamelin as Allied commander in chief Weygand 
began to set up a defense line on the south banks of the 
Somme and Aisne rivers. On May 28, King Leopold III 
surrendered the Belgian army and became a prisoner. 

Belgium's surrender left the remaining Allied forces 
under Gen. Sir John Gort in a desperate situation. They 
retreated to Dunkerque, the only escape port on the 
northern French coast. German armored units were 
close to the port, but they halted about 20 miles from 
Dunkerque. As the tiny Royal Air Force formed an aerial 
umbrella to repel German bombers, more than 336,000 

388 



British, Frencli, and Belgian troops waded out to British 
rescue ships that included fishing boats and motorboats. 
Some historians believe that Hitler allowed the Allied 
soldiers to escape, because he felt it would be easier to 
negotiate a peace with Britain if he spared them. 

The Fall of France. On June 5, the Germans launched 
a new offensive against France. In four days, the French 
were in hopeless retreat. Mussolini decided that the 
time had come for Italy to get a share of the spoils. On 
June 10, he told Britain and France that Italy would 
enter the war on Germany's side. The Italians did little 
except to invade a small part of the coast of southern 
France. But some of France's best troops were tied down 
guarding the Italian border against just such an attack. 
The Germans entered Paris on June 1 4, and pierced the 
Maginot Line from Germany two days later. 

The German victory caused a major split in the 
French government. One group wanted to move the 
government to North Africa and continue the war. 
Winston Churchill offered to unite Britain with France 
under a single government, if the F'rench would con- 
tinue to fight. But Premier Henri Philippe Petain of 
France decided to surrender. 

France signed an armistice with Germany on June 22. 
Hitler forced the French to surrender in the historic rail- 
way car in the Compiegne Forest where Germany had 
surrendered to the Allies in 19 18. The Germans then 
divided France into two zones. German troops occupied 
the northern and western part of the country. In the 
unoccupied southern part, Petain set up a government 
at Vichy. Thousands of Frenchmen fled to North Africa 
and to Britain, and continued to fight the Germans. 
Brig. Gen. Charles de Gaulle became leader of a Free 
France movement with headquarters in London. 

The Battle of Britain. France's surrender left Great 
Britain with no allies in western Europe. Germany had 
crushed six countries in three months, and Hitler boasted 
that he would march into London in two more months. 
He ordered his high command to plan an invasion of the 
British Isles, called Operation Sea Lion. But Hitler hoped 
he could force Britain to Surrender without invasion. 

In July, the German Litftwafe (air force) began to 
blast British airfields and ports. The Royal Air Force, 
outnumbered but with better planes and pilots, shot 
down so many aircraft that the Germans were forced to 
give up daylight attacks. In September, Reichsmarshal 
Hermann Goering took command of the air assaults. His 
Luftwaffe switched to night raids. The British used 
radar, a carefully guarded secret development, to track 
the attacking planes. From Sept. 7, 1940, through May 
II, 1 94 1, the Germans blasted London nightly. These 
raids became known as the London Blitz. The Germans 
also bombed other cities. Hitler offered to negotiate a 
peace, but the British did not even reply. 

By the middle of 1941 , Germany gave up its attempts 
to conquer Britain by air raids, after dropping more than 
1 90,000 tons of bombs. But it continued the raids into 
1944. Historians consider the Battle of Britain one of the 
turning-points of the war, because the British showed 
that they could defeat the Luftwaffe. German aircraft 
losses at the height of the battle had totaled more than 
2,600 planes. 

Assaults in Africa. About the time that Germany 
and Britain clashed in the air over the British Isles, Italy 
opened up other battle fronts. In August, 1940, Italian 



I 



troops in Africa pushed eastward from Ethiopia and 
overran British Somaliland. In September, Marshal 
Rodolfo Graziani's Italian forces in Libya advanced 
eastward into Egv'pt. By February, 1941, an Allied army 
under Gen. Sir Archibald P. VVavell had thrown the 
Italians back into Libya as far west as Bengasi. Wavell 
captured more than 130,000 prisoners. Hitler then sent 
the Afii/ca h'orps, a highly motorized and armored army 
under Gen. Erwin Rommel, to aid the Italians. 

Rominel caught the British army by surprise. Within 
two weeks, the Afrika Korps had recovered all the terri- 
tory the Italians had lost, and had driven the British 
back to the Nile delta in Egypt. But the Germans could 
not protect Italian Somaliland and Ethiopia. British 
Commonwealth forces recaptured British Somaliland 
and occupied all Italian East Africa by the end of 1941. 

Fighting in Eastern Europe 

The Balkans. When Germany and Italy failed to 
smash the Allies in Britain and Africa, they quickly 
changed their strategy. In October, 1 940, German troops 
marched into Romania on the pretext of protecting its 
oil fields and reorganizing its army. 

Mussolini demanded the right to use bases in Greece, 
but the Greek government refused. Without notifying 
1 litler, Mussolini sent his armies across the Greek border 
from Albania. But the Greeks fought back savagely, 
forcing the Italians back into Albania, and seizing one 
fourth of that country. 

Hungary and Romania joined the Axis in November, 
and Bulgaria joined a short time later. Yugoslavia also 
signed the Axis pact, but the people revolted against 
their pro-German ministers. German troops poured into 
Yugoslavia from the surrounding Axis countries. In 12 
days, the Germans destroyed the Yugoslav army. But 
guerrilla forces in the mountains, called Chetniks and 
Partisans, continued to fight die Germans and the 
Italians (see Mihailovich, Draza; Partisan; Tito). 

Hiller used Yugoslavia as a base to help the Italians 
in their Greek campaign. German troops entered Athens 
on Apr. 27, 1941, and handed the country over to the 
Italians. The British had sent troops to Greece, but most 
of them escaped to Egypt and Crete before Athens sur- 
rendered. Then Gernian paratroops and men in air 
transports made the first airborne invasion in history by 
landing on Crete. They wiped out most of the British 
forces on the island. Germany and Italy now controlled 
the Balkan nations. 

Tlie Invasion of Russia. Germany and Russia proved 
to be uneasy and suspicious partners. In a drive to 
strengthen their borders and obtain more naval bases in 
the Baltic, the Russians attacked Finland on Nov. 30, 
1939. After severe fighting, the Finns surrendered in 
March, 1940. In the summer of 1940, Russia seized the 
Baltic countries of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. 

Many signs pointed to a German invasion of Russia. 
After Rudolf Hess, Hitler's deputy, flew to Great Britain 
in May, 1941, the British repeated their earlier warnings 
that Germany would soon invade Russia. But the Rus- 
sians did not act on the warning. See Hess, Rudolph. 

On June 22, 1941, more than 150 German and other 
Axis divisions swept across the Russian border in 
Operation Barbarossa. The 3,000,000-man invasion force 
faced about 2,000,000 Russian troops. The battle line 
stretched 2,000 miles from the Arctic to the Black Sea. 




Urilislt Ii^forniation Service 



Evacuation of Allied troops es- 

DUNKERQUE coping from Dunkerque in 1 940 was 

carried out by British rescue ships. 



389 




LONDON BLITZ 

Air Raids hit London nightly 
during the Battle of Britain. 
The Germans tried to bomb the 
British into surrender. 



tfd Press Int. 



Commanding the invading forces were the three army 
group commanders who had concjiiered France. Field 
Marshals \'on Bock, Von Leeb. and \'on Rundstedt. 

Hitler announced that he had ordered the attack "to 
save the entire world from the dangers of Bolshevism." 
Germany needed Russia's vast supplies of foods, petro- 
leum, and other raw materials. The Germans confidently 
expected another blitzkrieg. They made no preparations 
for a long struggle, and did not even issue winter uni- 
forms to the troops. 

For almost five weeks, the Germans drove the Red 
Army back, and captured thousands of prisoners. Most 



of the world e.xpected Russia to collapse. As the Ger- 
mans advanced, the Russians burned or destroyed fac- 
tories, dams, railroads, food supplies, and everything 
else they could not move. Bands of Russians fought 
behind the German lines. The government began mov- 
ing factories and machinery to comparative safety east 
of the Ural Mountains. It hurried troops westward from 
Siberia. Great Britain and the United States shipped 
lend-lease supplies to Russia through the Arctic Ocean 
and the Persian Gulf. They lost many ships in the 
Arctic to German planes and submarines operating 
from Norway on the icy Murmansk convoy run. 



America Joins the War 



After war began in Europe in 1939, people in the 
Americas debated whether their countries should take 
part or stay out. Canada declared war on Germany 
almost at once. The United States shifted its policy from 
neutrality to preparedness. It began to expand its armed 
forces, build defense plants, and give the Allies all-out 
aid short of war. Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 
brought the United States into the war on the Allied 
side. Every country in the Americas eventually declared 
war on the Axis. But only Brazil, Canada. Mexico, and 
the United States actually provided fighting forces. 

Defending fhe Americas 

Isolation or Intervention? The threat of war in the 
i93o"s had sharply divided public opinion in the United 
States. Most Americans hoped the Allies would win, 
but they also hoped to keep the United States out of 
war. A second group, called isolationists, wanted the 
country to stay out of the war at almost anv cost. A 
third group, called interventionists, wanted the United 
States to do all in its power to aid the Allies. 

The outbreak of war in 1939 also split the people of 
Canada. Many Canadians had criticized the British and 
French policy of appeasing Hitler in the middle ig3o's. 
After Britain declared war on Germany, many Cana- 



dians felt that Canada's interests lay with those of Britain 
and the Commonwealth. But others felt that Canada 
should remain neutral. Canada declared war on Ger- 
many on Se])t. 10. 1Q39. and on Japan on Dec. 8, 1941. 

The Arsenal of Democracy. The United States re- 
mained neutral when Germany invaded Poland in 
1939. But the government stopped all shipments of 
.'\merican arms to warring nations. Later, it allowed the 
Allies to buy goods on a "cash and carry" basis. By the 
end of 1940, Great Britain had almost used up its funds 
to buy arms. China, in a death stnaggle with Japan, had 
already exhausted its funds. In September, the United 
.States gave Great Britain 50 over-age destroyers in re- 
turn for the right to lease bases for 99 \'ears in Bermuda, 
Newfoundland, and the British West Indies. 

President Roosevelt called upon the United -States to 
be "the great arsenal of democracy," and to supply war 
materials to the Allies through sale, loan, or lease. The 
lend-lease bill became law on March 11, 1941 (see 
Lend-Le.'^se). During the next four years, the United 
States sent more than $50,000,000,000 worth of war 
materials to the Allies. About half went to Britain and 
one fourth to Russia. 

Canada contributed its own form of lend-lease, called 
mutual aid. Under the Mutual \\d Act of 1943, Canada 



390 



sent about $2,000,000,000 worth of supplies to the 
Allied countries, over and above what they could pay for. 

Manpower 

Expanding the Armed Forces. In 1939, the United 
States had about 174,000 men in the army; 126,400 in 
the navy; 26,000 in the army air corps; 19,700 in the 
marine corps; and 10,000 in the coast guard. At the 
height of its strength in 1945, the United States had 
6,000,000 in the army; 3,400,000 in the navy; 2,400,000 
in the army air forces; 484,000 in the marine corps; and 
170,000 in the coast guard. In 1939, the United States 
had about 2,500 airplanes and 760 warships. By 1945, it 
had about 80,000 airplanes and 2,500 warships. 

Canada's military forces went through a similar ex- 
pansion. In September, 1939, Canada had 4.500 men in 
the army, i ,774 in the navN', and 4,000 in the air force. 
The peak strength of the Canadian Army was 481,500, 
the navy 92,900, and the air corps 206,300. 

The United States and Canada used draft laws to 
build their armed forces. The United States Selective 
Training and Service Act became law on Sept. 16, 1940 
(see Dr.\ft, Military). The Canadian conscription law 
went into effect in June, 1940. Parliament amended it 
on July 23, 1942, to allow the government to send 
drafted soldiers overseas. 

Women in the Services. As in World War I, women 
otiier than nurses joined the U.S. armed forces. They 
enlisted in the Women's Army Auxiliary Corps 
(WAAC), which later became the Women's Army Corps 
(W.\C); the Women Appointed for Voluntary Emer- 
gency Service in the Navy (WAVES); the Women's 
Auxiliary Ferrying Command (WAF); the Women's 
Reserve of the Coast Guard Reserves (SPARS); and the 
Marine Corps Women's Reserves. Women had a wider 
and more important role than they had played in World 
War I, when most of them were clerks. See SPARS; 
WAC; WAF; WAVES. 

The newly created Women's .'\rmy Corps of Canada 



WORLD WAR II 

reached a peak strength of 20,020. Canadian women 
also enlisted in the Royal Canadian Air Force Women's 
Division, which grew to 15,153 members. The Women's 
Royal Canadian Naval Service had 5,853 members. 

Women in the U.S. armed forces served in almost 
every theater of war. Most Canadian women in the 
armed forces served in Canada, Europe, and the United 
States. Women helped release men for combat jobs. 
They became clerks, cooks, mechanics, vehicle drivers, 
and radiologists, and filled other positions. 

The Battle of the Atlantic 

Blockade and Convoys. The war in the Atlantic 
Ocean began on Scjji. 3, 1939, when the British an- 
nounced a naval blockade of Germany. On September 
1 1 , the Germans ordered a counter-blockade of the Allies 
with the aim of preventing shipments of food and war 
materials from reaching Britain and France. 

The British set up a convoy system for merchant ships 
sailing from Halifax, in Canada, to the British Isles. Air 
patrols helped protect convoys by covering much of this 
route. On September 4, the U.S. Navy received orders 
to "shoot on sight" at any vessel that threatened Ameri- 
can ships or any ships escorted by American vessels. On 
Oct. 31, 1941, a German submarine torpedoed the 
destroyer Reuben James, making it the first American 
naval vessel to be lost by enemy action in the war. 

In March, 1943, the Allied high command gave the 
British and Canadian navies the primary job of protect- 
ing North Atlantic convoys. The United States had chief 
responsibility for convoys in the central Atlantic and the 
Caribbean Sea. As the time for the invasion of Normandy 
drew near in 1944, the Canadian fleet took over the task 
of escorting North Atlantic convoys. 

U-Boats, or German submarines, constantly menaced 
Allied shipping in the Atlantic. Compared with the sub- 
marine, Germany's surface fleet caused the Allies little 



STALINGRAD 



RUSSIA 




Russian Soldiers inched forward in house-to-house fighting. The 
Germans lost almost an entire army ot the Battle of Stalingrad. 



*^ 



■'I 



-^^jft*-^ 




V. ♦. 



^J . 5»f 



^^^Km^^Mi^^ 




PEARL HARBOR 
ATTACKED 



trouble. Its pocket battleships were not as large as other 
battleships, but could travel faster. In December, 1939, 
a British naval force in the South Atlantic cornered a 
pocket battleship, the Admiral Graf Spec, and damaged 
it. The German warship took refuge in Montevideo 
harbor, where its captain scuttled it on Hitler's order 
and committed suicide. 

On Jan. 30, 1941, the Germans announced that ships 
of any nationality taking aid to Britain would be tor- 
pedoed. Rear Adm. Karl Doenitz, commander of the 
German submarine fleet, devised "wolf-pack" tactics 
for attacking Allied shipping. His U-boats operated in 
groups of about 8 or 9, and sometimes as many as 20. 
During November, 1 942, the Allies lost a record 636,907 
tons of shipping. By the spring of 1 943, the Germans had 
as many as 235 U-boats in action. 

The Allies fought the submarines in many \va&gt;'s. They 
bombed enemy submarines and shipyards. Radar and 
improved undenvater sound devices, including sonar, 
aided in detecting submarines (see Son.\r). The Allies 
also built destroyer escorts and escort cai'riers. During 
the last two years of the wai', the Allies sank submarines 
faster than the U-boats could sink .Allied ships. 

War Comes to the United States 

Conflicts with Japan. Since 1937, Japan had been 
buying cotton, gasoline, scrap iron, and aircraft equip- 
ment from the United States. It sold lai-ge quantities of 
silk to the United States to create the credit for its pur- 
chases. After the "undeclared w'ar" between Japan and 
China began in 1937, most Americans sympathized 
with the Chinese. In 1938, the United States extended 
$25,000,000 in credit to China. It also placed a "moral 
embargo" on exporting American aircraft to Japan. 
After Japan occupied Indochina in 1940, the United 
States stopped shipping gasoline, iron, steel, and rubber 
to Japan. The government also froze all Japanese assets 
in the United States. 

The Axis countries turned to Latin America for war 
materials. In 1941, the United States government pro- 
hibited American companies from doing business with 



German, Italian, and Japanese firms in Latin America. 

Relations between Japan and the United States be- 
came increasingly tense in the fall of 1941. when a new 
Japanese cabinet took office. Lt. Gen. Hideki Tojo, 
leader of the extremist Japanese military group, became 
premier. His cabinet immediately began planning for 
war with the L'nited States. Tojo sent a special repre- 
sentative, .Saburo Kurusu, to help Ambassador Kichi- 
saburo Nomura negotiate with .Secretary of State Cor- 
dell Hull. The two countries argued over American aid 
to China, the Japanese troops in Indochina, Japan's 
frozen assets, and its exploitation of resources in the 
Netherlands East Indies. Late in November, the Japa- 
nese cabinet council accepted Tojo's decision to go to 
war against the L'nited States, Great Britain, and The 
Netherlands. 

The Attack on Pearl Harbor. In October, the Japa- 
nese Army and Navy had completed their plans to 
bomb Pearl Harbor in Hawaii, and to invade Thailand, 
the Malay peninsula, and the Philippines. Early in 
November, Adm. Isoroku Yamamoto, commander in 
chief of the Japanese Combined Fleet, set Monday, 
December 8 (Japanese time), as the approximate day 
of the attack. While Japanese emissaries were negotiat- 
ing with Hull, the 33-ship Japanese fleet secretly 
steamed eastward. 

About 7:55 a.m., Dec. 7, 1941 (Hawaii time), the 
first bombs fell on Pearl Harbor, .'\bout 360 Japanese 
planes attacked Pacific Fleet imits at the naval base, 
and army aircraft at Hickam Field and other nearby 
military installations. Fortunately for the United States, 
no aircraft carriers were tied up at the base during the 
attack. When the assault ended nearly two hours later, 
the Pacific Fleet had lost the battleships Arizona, Cali- 
fornia, Oklahoma, and West Virginia, the mine la\'er 
Oglala, and the target ship Utah. All ships sunk, except 
the Arizona, Oklahoma, and Utah, were later repaired 
and returned to service. The attack also destroyed 1 74 
.American planes and damaged 4 battleships, 3 cruisers, 
and 3 destro&gt;ers. The Japanese had concentrated on 
attacking ships and planes, leaving repair facilities tela- 



392 




JSfCtntB-&amp;eveiUh ^onflrKS of ih IHnitfd ^tatn of ^mma: 

9i tbt yfrcl frfHian 

BcvB WMJ IkU *l the C^ c&lt; Wuhir«l« on FnJty ^ ^^^^ 
^V 4f jHWjary, one thouund nine hundred utd forty-inr 



JOINT RESOLUTION 

K iHntit; ll'jil n -t &gt;■(■•■( &gt;\Ar pvi-t. Iflwifn ilic lni|&gt;&lt;Tiiil G'lvvmmpiit 

•.r .U]&gt;An •iii.l il&lt;p novoniMiriir 1 llic [iHipIp of thi&gt; VaitrA .SUls 

and niakiriit pr"v:-i"ii- to jjr'&gt;«*^iiti&gt; llip «aiii*. 



WU-nr*^ (!»• |uii&gt;rrial Gmi irnnipnt of Japan h*&gt; iHimniKlMl unpra- 
loknl «cu of »&lt;r i(piiii&gt;4 iht G&lt;-v«mmFn( ami (he people of th« 
1'm.(»^I Sl.il»&gt; of America : Tli«rffoi» be it 

Retail: it by I fie Senate and Bov»e of RtprfttiUatireB of Iks 
t'mitrJ Stale* of America in Co^grrM ntifmbffd. Thai (he stale of 
war betvfcn the t'niCeH Stotps ant! ihe ImpcrinI Government of 
Japan nhich t»a* ihus been thrust upon the Vniled Slates is hereby 
forni-llv .le-UrfJi anJ llie President is herrhy authonwrf ami 
■lincted to employ the entire naval and military fopr« of the VniteJ 
StAles aii&lt;i the resources of the Government to corrj- un war agarnM 
tlie Inipennl Government of Japan; and, (o bnnft the conflirt to a 
Mifvessful tenninntiiin. all of the resources of the country are hereby 
pWtcei) by the Congress of the United Slates. 




The Attack on Pearl Harbor on Dec. 7, 
1941, plunged the United States into war. 
Japanese aircraft sank 18 ships and killed or 
wounded 3,681 persons. President Franklin D. 
Roosevelt signed the declaration of war. 



SptaJcer of the lit 



Vkc Pr«*ident of iKe Unil^ St^m.mi 

Prfident of the Smatt. 






lively undamaged. They had dealt the Pacific Fleet and 
Hawaii's air defense a crippling blow. But they made a 
major mistake when they failed to return and destroy 
Pearl Harbor Naval Base completely. See Pearl Har- 
bor Naval Base. 

In Tokyo, the Japanese government immediately 
declared war on the United .States and Great Britain. 
The following day. President Roosevelt asked Congress 
for a declaration of war against Japan. He called 
December 7 "a date which will live in infamy." Only 
Jeannette Rankin, Congresswoman from Montana, 
voted against the declaration. On December 1 1 , Ger- 
many and Italy declared war on the United States, and 



Congress then declared war on Germany and Italy. 
The question of responsibility for the losses at Pearl 
Harbor aroused a great controversy. Associate Justice 
Owen J. Roberts of the Supreme Court of the United 
States led one investigation, in addition to one by the 
Navy Department, one by the War Department, and 
one by a special joint committee of Congress. The Con- 
gressional investigators reprimanded the senior com- 
manders at Pearl Harbor. Adm. Husband E. Kinomel 
(1882- ) and Lt. Gen. Walter C. Short (1880-1949), 
for "errors of judgment." They also agreed that the 
United States had failed to be alert to the threat of a 
sudden attack. 



The Allies Attack in Africa and Europe 



Allied defeats in Europe came to a halt in late 1941. 
The Russians took the offensive along the eastern front. 
The Allies invaded North Africa in 1942, and forced 
Italy to sign an armistice in 1943. Then Allied troops 
swarmed ashore in northern France in 1944 in the largest 
amphibious operation in histor\'. Attacks from all sides 
finally forced Germany to surrender in 1945. 

On the Russian Front 

The turn of the tide on the eastern front came with 
the bitter Russian winter of 1941-1942. Snow, mud, 
cold, and darkness stalled the German armies. Von 
Bock's troops stormed to within 40 miles of Moscow, 



but Russian defenders in the surrounding forests threw 
them back. Then Gen. Georgi K. Zhukov, the defender 
of Moscow, launched a counteroffensive. By Dec. 16, 

1 94 1, the Germans had been forced back into winter 
defensive positions. 

The Russian offensive continued into the spring of 

1942. In May, the Germans resumed their attack. They 
captured Sevastopol on the Black Sea after besieging 
the city for eight months. In late August, the German 
Sixth Army drove south toward the important oil- 
distribution center of StaHngrad on the \'olga River. 
But Stalingrad held firm and Russian troops finally 
broke a two-month German siege. Col. Gen. Andrei I. 



393 



WORLD WAR II 

Yeicmenko's armies from the south and Col. Gen. 
Konstantin K. Rokossovsky's armies from the north 
surrounded the Sixth Army and destro&gt;ed it. When 
Field Marshal Friedrich von Paulus. the Sixth Army 
commander, surrendered on Feb. 2, 1943, only 1 10,000 
of his original force of more than 270,000 men were still 
alive. The victory at Stalingrad, boasted Stalin, "signi- 
fied the decline of the German-fascist army." See 
Stalingrad. Battle of. 

The North African Campaign 

The British fought a seesaw campaign against the 
Germans and Italians in North Africa, taking and losing 
ground over and over again. In May, 1942, Rommers 
Afrika Korps, aided by Italian troops, began a powerful 
offensive. Capturing Tobruk in Libya, they moved 
toward Egypt. By July, strong British resistance and 
Rommel's supply shortage had halted the Axis attacks 
at El Alamein, Egypt. In October, the British Eighth 
Army under Gen. Sir Bernard L. Montgomery took the 
offensive, and rolled on to Tripoli and southern Tunisia. 
This victory was a major turning point of the war. 

Landings. Along with the British offensive in Tunisia, 
the .\llies planned an invasion of French North Africa 
with the code name of Operation Torch. They hoped to 
force the Axis armies out of Africa, and also to relieve 
pressure on the hard-pressed Russian forces, which were 
reeling under a new German offensive. Lt. Gen. Dwight 
D. Eisenhower commanded an Allied force that landed 
on the coast of Algeria and Morocco on Nov. 8, 1942. 
About 500 troop and supply ships, escorted by more 
than 350 warships, transported Allied troops from the 
United States and the British Isles. The invasion caught 
the German high command completely by surprise. 

The Allies made elaborate preparations to capture 
French North Africa with as little fighting as possible. 
Allied diplomats plotted with French patriotic groups, 
and Maj. Gen. Mark VV. Clark secretly landed in North 
Africa from a submarine to plan with the French. French 
forces resisted the landings, but Adm. Jean Darlan, 
the Vichy French leader, ordered them to stop fighting. 

Final Collapse. As soon as Hitler learned about the 
Allied landings in North Africa, he ordered German 



troops to occupy all France. The Germans tried to 
capture the main French fleet at Toulon, but the French 
managed to sink about 50 ships. An assassin shot Darlan 
on Dec. 24. 1942, and Gen, Henri Giraud succeeded 
him as chief of state in North Africa. 

Early in 1 943, President Roosevelt and Prime Minis- 
ter Churchill conferred at Casablanca, Morocco. They 
announced that the Allies would accept nothing less 
than unconditional surrender from the Axis nations. 
While U.S. troops pushed eastward across Algeria, the 
British Eighth Army advanced into southern Tunisia. 
On May 12, 1943, the last organized .^xis army force in 
Africa surrendered. The ."Mlies had killed, wounded, or 
captured about 350,000 Axis soldiers, and had suffered 
about 70,000 casualties in the North African cainpaign. 

The War in the Mediterranean 

Allied control of North Africa ended Axis threats to 
Egs'pt and the Suez Canal, and to British oil resources 
in the Middle East. In June, 1941, British troops had 
forced the German-sponsored government in Iraq out of 
office. British and Russian soldiers jointly occupied Iran. 
Free French and British forces took over Syiia and 
Lebanon from Vichy French troops. 

Sicily. The Allies moved swiftly to take advantage 
of their African victory. On July 10, 1943, Gen. Sir 
Harold Alexander's Fifteenth Army Group landed on 
Sicily. During the fighting, Mussolini fell from power 
in Italy. On July 25, Marshal Pietro Badoglio became 
premier of Italy. The Italian government imprisoned 
Mussolini, but a daring band of Geirnan paratroopers 
later rescued him. The Allies occupied all Sicily on 
August 17, after a 39-day campaign. Badoglio's govern- 
ment signed an armistice with the Allies on September 
3, and announced it five days later. 

Italy. British and Canadian forces of the Eighth 
Arm\' used Sicily as a springboard for invading the toe 
of the Italian peninsula. Lt. Gen. Mark W. Clark's 
L'.S. Fifth Army, which had sailed fiom Africa, landed 
at .Salerno on September 9. A German counterattack 
threatened to push the Fifth .'\rmy back to the sea. .After 
intense fighting. Clark's men swept out of the marshy 
beachhead and linked with the Eighth Army. 

Italy became a "co-belligerent" and declared war on 
Germany on October 13. The Allies hoped that Italian 



British Information Services 




North Africa fell to Allied 
control in 1943. Tanks battled 
in the fierce desert heat. British 
Eighth Army soldiers, /eft, 
stormed the Axis lines, armed 
with rifles and Khukri swords. 




^^-^ El aUmein 



CASABLANCA 



AFRICA- 



soldiers would attack German garrisons in all parts of 
the countn-. But most Italians allowed themselves to be 
disarmed h\ the Germans. The Germans continued to 
fight Allied advances into the country. 

The Allied drive up the Italian boot proved to be a 
painfullv slow struggle against a determined 400,000- 
man German arm&gt;- led b\- Field Marshal Albert Kessel- 
ring. The Allies also faced obstacles such as floods, mud, 
mountains, and the winter cold. 

Early in November. 1943. the Allies reached a line 
about 75 miles south of Rome, but they could not pierce 
the German defenses. Naples had fallen to the Allies 
after landings near Salerno. Late in January. 1944. the 
Allies tried to outflank the German lines by landing 
troops near Anzio, 33 miles south of Rome. But the 
Germans held the high ground overlooking the coast, 
and hemmed in the in\'aders on a small beachhead. 
The town of Cassino stood about halfwa\' between 
Naples and Rome, The .\llies bombed the monastery 
that stood on top of Monte Cassino. The Germans had 
fortified the hill and occupied the monastery. The .-Mlies 
finally captured Cassino and pushed northward. The 
Italians made Rome an open city by announcing that 
they would not defend it. On June 4. it became the 
first Axis capital to fall. 

Two months later, the Allies captured Florence. The 
Mediterranean .\llied Air Forces supported the ground 
forces by attacking German troops and supply centers. 
The Allies finallv reached the Gothic Line, a German 
defense system four miles deep across northern Italy. 

The Air War in Europe 

The Allied Air Offensive played a major role in 
defeating Germany and Italy. The Germans had de- 
signed the Luflwaffe. their air force, to work closely with 
ground forces in blitzkrieg campaigns. German combat 
aircraft included the Messerschmitt and ForAv- !)"»// fighter 
planes, the Junker. Dornia. and Hemkel bombers, and 
the Stuka dive bomber. 

The Allies concentrated on developing bombers that 
could fly long distances, .\llied air forces grew until thev 
could make almost daily raids over Europe. By 1942, 
as many as i ,000 Allied bombers made such raids. 

I he Ro\al Air Force Bomber Command, under Air 
Chief Marshal Sir Arthur T. Harris, favored saturation 




WORLD WAR II 

bombing by night. This technique meant dropping a 
large load of bombs in the general area of a target with 
the belief that enough bombs would hit the target to 
destroy it. British airmen flew such planes as the 
DfHai'illand Mosquito, a medium bomber; the Avro 
Lancaster, a heavy bomber; and the Hawker Hurricane 
and Supermarine Spitfire, both fighters. 

The U,S, Eighth Air Force favored pin-point bombing. 
This strateg\' involved dropping bombs on important 
targets from high altitudes by daylight. Eighth .Mr Force 
pilots flew the Flying Fortress and Liberator heavy bomb- 
ers, and the Thunderbolt. L'glilning. and Mustang fighters. 

In 1944. Lt. Gen. Carl Spaatz became commander of 
the L^.S. Strategic Air Forces in Europe. His command 
included Lt. Gen. James H. Doolittle's Eighth Air 
Force, based in England, and the Fifteenth .\\x Force, 
based in Italy imder Maj. Gen. Nathan F. Twining. Lt. 
Gen. Hoyt S. N'andenberg commanded the L'.S. Ninth 
Air Force in western Eiu'ope. 

Crippling German Industries. Allied strategic air 
forces blasted .Axis military and industrial targets, such 
as factories, oil refineries, and railroads. The tactical air 
forces supported ground troops and attacked enemy air- 
craft and airfields. 

For five days in late February, 1944. Allied air forces 
in ovenvhelming strength bombed German aircraft 
indusuies. Gen. Henry H. Arnold, commanding general 
of the L'.S. Army Air Forces, reported that "those five 
days changed the history of the air war," Allied bombers 
blasted German aircraft plants and other factories at 
Bernberg, Bnanswick, Leipzig, and .Schweinfurt. Other 
planes raided Augsburg, Rcgcnsburg, and Stuttgart. 
Reichsmarshal Hermann Goering. commander in chief 
of the LuftwaflTe, had boasted that Allied bombers 
would never reach Berlin. But they did, beginning as 
early as August, 1940. In Augttst, 1944. Allied bombers 
hammered at the rich oil fields at Ploesti, Romania. 

Instead of attempting to destroy entire industries, the 
Allies tried to knock out key targets. For example, 
bombers destroyed dams in the Ruhr \"alley, depriving 
many German industries of their power sources. They 
hit ball-bearing plants, slowing down the production of 
machineiy, aircraft, and tanks. The Allies destroyed 

British Information Services 




WORLD WAR II 

more than 56,000 German aircraft, and dropped about 
3,000,000 tons of bombs in Europe. American pilots flew 
about 75,000 bomber missions and 1,000,000 sorties. 
The British flew more than 380,000 sorties. American 
and British losses numbered about 40,000 aircraft. 

The Invasion of Europe 

In their first wartime meeting, in December, 1941, 
Roosevelt and Churchill had adopted a '"Defeat Ger- 
many First" strategy. The Allies considered an assault 
across the English channel as early as 1 942 . The Russians 
demanded that the Allies open a second batde front to 
relieve German pressure on their troops in eastern 
Europe. Gen. George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff of the 
U.S. Army, had long insisted that the main drive against 
Germany should come in northern France, and that an 
invasion would bring a decisive victory. 

In August, 1942, the Allies launched a major raid on 
Dieppe, on the northern coast of France. About 5,000 
Canadian, 1,000 British, and 50 United States troops 
held parts of the coast for nine hours. The Canadians 
suffered extremely heav)' casualties, but the raid pro- 
vided valuable information on amphibious tactics. 

Preparations for the invasion of the Normandy coast 
began early in 1943, when the Allies set up a planning 
staff under Lt. Gen. Frederick E. Morgan of Great 
Britain. The invasion plan received the code name of 
Operation Overlord. Roosevelt and Churchill selected 
Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower as supreme commander of 
the Allied Expeditionary Force. Hitler had appointed 
Field Marshal Karl Gerd von Rundstedt as commander 
in chief of the western front to defend Festimg Europa 
(Fortress Europe). The Germans built the Atlantic Wall, 
fortifications stretching from Norway to Spain. 

D-Day. The Allies assembled a force of almost 
3,000,000 men, and stored 16,000,000 tons of arms, 
munitions, and supplies in Britain for the great invasion. 
The Allies had 5,000 large ships, 4,000 smaller landing 
craft, and more than 1 1,000 aircraft. Months before the 
invasion. Allied bombers pounded the Normandy coast 
to prevent the Germans from building up their military 
strength. The invasion had been set for June 5, but 
storms forced Eisenhower to postpone it one day. Para- 
troopers went ahead of the invasion forces to cut railroad 
lines, blow up bridges, and seize landing fields. Gliders 
brought in men, jeeps, light artillery, and small tanks. 
Allied warships fired 200 tons of shells a minute at the 
German coastal batteries. 

Eisenhower told his forces: "You are about to embark 
upon a great crusade." The first wave of infantry and 
armored troops, commanded by Montgomery, crossed 
the choppy English Channel under a cloudy, overcast 
sky. They waded ashore on a 50-mile front at 6:30 a.m. 
on D-Day, June 6, 1944. To the west, U.S. First Army 
troops landed on both sides of the Vire River. To the 
east, British and Canadian infantrymen of the British 
Second Army pushed ashore near Caen. Allied engi- 
neers devised prefabricated harbors in which to unload 
troops and supplies. These harbors and floating piers 
were assigned the code name of Mulberry. See D-Day. 

While Von Rundstedt's forces bitterly resisted the 
Allied landings. Hitler opened a new age in air warfare. 
On June 13, he sent the first flying bombs over London. 




jUPfct 




wide Worltj 

Bombers, above, hit indus- 
trial and military targets. 
A I R Fighters, right, attacked enemy 

— j^xAi c n aircraft, troops, and ships. Air 

r \.J W C K power proved decisive in 

the outcome of World War II. 



The Germans called their new secret weapon the 
Vergeltungswafe (Vengeance Weapon), or V-i. The 
British called it the buzz bomb. The Germans also devel- 
oped the V-2 (see Guided Missile). 

The Breakthrough. The capture of Cherbourg on 
Jtme 27 gave the Allies an excellent harbor. The Allies 
also had an oil pipeline, called Pluto, that ran under the 
English Channel to Cherbourg. Saint L6 fell to Allied 
troops on July 18. This opened the way for Lt. Gen. 
Omar N. Bradley's U.S. First Army to break out of the 
Normandy peninsula and sweep across France. During 
the assault, a misdirected bomb from a U.S. Army Air 
Forces plane killed Lt. Gen. Lesley J. McNair, com- 
mander of the U.S. Arniy Ground Forces. 

On July 20, as the clima.x of a plot by German mili- 
tary leaders. Col. Count Klaus von Stauffenberg placed 
a time-bomb under Rider's table during a staff meeting 



in a hut. The bomb exploded, but only injured Hitler. 

Bradley and Montgomery became army group com- 
manders on August I. By August 6, tanks of Lt. Gen. 
George S. Patton's U.S. Third Army had raced south 
and cut off the Brittany Peninsula. After capturing 
Caen, Canadian forces rolled toward Falaise. They 
linked with U.S. First Army units under Lt. Gen. Court- 
ney H. Hodges and trapped r 00,000 German troops. 
Those who escaped the trap included Field Marshal 
Giinther von Kluge, who had recently replaced 
Von Rundstedt as commander in chief. 

On August 15, Lt. Gen. Alexander M. Patch's U.S. 
Seventh Army and Gen. Jean de Lattre de Tassigny's 
French First Army made an amphibious landing near 
Cannes in southern France in Operation Anvil. French 
soldiers and other American First Army forces from the 
northwest entered Paris on August 25. 

In the north. Allied armies smashed forward from the 
Seine River to cross the Somme and Marne rivers and 
the Belgian border. Brussels fell to British and Canadian 
troops early in September. Eisenhower hoped to capture 
Antwerp and knock out many of the \'-2 rocket launch- 
ing sites. He gave priority of supplies to his northern 
armies. As a result, hard-driving 'Fhird Army armored 
units had to halt for a short time. Montgomery's forces 
pushed into The Netherlands. Hodges' First Army ad- 
vanced into Luxembourg and crossed the German 
border on September 12. In the largest airborne opera- 
tion ever attempted, Lt. Gen. Lewis H. Brereton's First 
Allied Airborne Army dropped three paratroop divisions 
from 4,500 planes and gliders into The Netherlands to 
seize bridges in advance of the giound forces. They 
achieved only part of their objectives. 

Allied troops swept up the Rhone \'alley from south- 
ern France, joining the Third Army near Dijon on Sep- 
tember 15. Montgomery's men seized VValcheren Island 
in the North Sea, suffering heavy casualties. Fierce 



WORLD WAR II 

enemy resistance forced the First Army to battle savagely 
for Aachen and the Huertgen Forest in Germany. 

The Battle of the Bulge. Before the Allies could cross 
the Rhine, they had to face a last-stand German on- 
slaught in the Ardennes Forest. Hitler personally planned 
a swift breakthrough to capture Antwerp and split the 
Allied armies in two. Field Marshal Walter Model, 
army ground commander under Von Rundstedt, 
directed the surprise assault, which had the code name 
oi Operation Greif. LTnder cover of heavy fog, 38 German 
divisions struck along a 50-mile front on December 16. 
Mechanized units overran several First Army positions. 

Model's armies drove the Allies almost to the Meuse 
River, and surrounded Bastogne in the southern 
Ardennes. Asked to surrender. Brig. Gen. Anthony C. 
McAuliffe of the loist Airborne Division at Bastogne 
replied: '"Nuts." Third Army armored units pierced the 
German lines from the south and relieved Bastogne. 
This attack in the Ardennes becainc known as the Battle 
of the Bulge, because of the bulging shape of the battle- 
gi'ound on a map. By early Januaiy, 1945, the Allies had 
recovered all the gi'ound they had lost in the battle. The 
Germans had 1 10,000 men taken prisoners and suffered 
about 100,000 other casualties. 

Early in February, the Allies cleared the west bank of 
the Roer River, west of the Rhine. After capturing 
Cologne, First Army troops advanced toward Remagen. 
On March 7, they found the Ludendorff Bridge that 
crossed the Rhine at Remagen still intact. German 
soldiers tried to destroy the bridge, but not all their 
charges exploded. First Army units raced across to set 
up a bridgehead east of the Rhine. A few days later, the 
Third Army crossed the Rhine to the south and then 
three Allied armies crossed the river to the north. On 
April I, the First Army and Lt. Gen. William H. Simp- 



wide World 






U.S. Coast Guard; L'.S. Army 



son's Ninth Army made contact near Paderborn. This 
action isolated the rich Ruhr Valley and trapped more 
than 300,000 enemy soldiers. 

The Russian Advance. As the Allies raced toward the 
heart of Germany, Russian armies rolled toward Berlin 
from the east. The last major German offensive in 
Russia, in July, 1943, had failed. Within a year, the 
Russians had recaptured the Ukiaine, the Crimea, White 
Russia, eastern Poland, and most of Lithuania. Russian 
troops drove into Romania, Bulgaria, and the Baltic 
states. In October, 1944, Finland again surrendered to 
the Russians, and declared war on Germany. Russian 
armies swept into eastern Hungary and joined forces 
with Tito in Yugoslavia. They swung north and captured 
Vienna and eastern Austria. In five months, Russia 
knocked the four Axis satellites — Romania, Bulgaria, 
Finland, and Hungary — out of the war. 

Early in January, 1945, the Red Army crashed into 



The Second Front opened 
on June 6, 1944, when Allied 
infantry landed on the Nor- 
mandy coast on five beach- 
heads. A naval task force took 
them across the Channel. 




Talking to the Troops, Supreme Allied Commander Dv^ight 
D. Eisenhower met black-faced airborne troops before they 
dropped into France behind the German lines on D-Day. 



Warsaw and Krakow. The people of Warsaw had ex- 
pected the Russians to continue westward, and rebelled 
against the Germans. But the Russians halted east of 
the city, and let the Gemians put down the rebellion. 

For the final assault on Germany in April, the Rus- 
sians assembled more than 4,000,000 men. Marshal 
Georgi Zhukov's First White Russian and First Ukrain- 
ian Army groups drove toward Berlin, and Marshal 
Konstantin Rokossovsky's Second White Russian Army 
group marched into northern Germany. Hitler ap- 
pointed Col. Gen. Heinz Guderian to head the fast- 
crumbling German eastern front. 

Victory in Europe. From all directions, Allied armies 
closed in on the Germans. Canadian troops under Gen. 
Henry D. G. Crerar liberated The Netherlands, and 
Lt. Gen. Miles C. Dempsey's British Second Army 
headed for Bremen in the north. Bradley's group of four 
armies raced eastward to the Elbe River to meet the 
Russians. In the south, .\llied armies under Gen. Jacob 
L. Devers rolled toward Austria and Czechoslovakia. 
They hoped to cut off Berlin from the Bavarian Moun- 
tains, where it was rumored that many determined Ger- 
mans hoped to make a last-ditch stand. 

Late in April, Heinrich Himmler, head of the German 
home guard and the dreaded Gestapo (secret police), 
tried to negotiate a peace with Great Britain and the 



398 



United States. The Allies demanded that German 
troops on all fronts surrender. On April 25. First Army 
patrols and Red Armv units joined forces at Torgau. on 
the Elbe River. A few days later. Italian partisans 
captured and executed Mussolini, who had tried to 
escape into Switzerland. German forces in Italv sur- 
rendered on May 2. 

On May i, the German radio announced that Hitler 
had died while defending Berlin against the Russians, 
and had named Grand Adm. Karl Doenitz as his suc- 
cessor. Allied investigators later learned that Hitler and 
his wife, Eva Braun. had committed suicide in Berlin on 
April 30, and that their bodies had been burned. Berlin 



WORLD WAR II 

finally fell to the invading Russian armies on May 2. 
Early on the morning of May 7, Gol. Gen. .-Mfred Jodl 
of the German high command entered Allied head- 
quarters in a red school building at Reims, France. 
1 here, on behalf of his go\'ernment, he signed the terms 
of unconditional surrender. Lt. Gen. Walter B. Smith. 
Eisenhower's chief of staff, signed for the .Mlies. The 
free world celebrated May 8 as \'-E (Victory in Europe) 
Day. On May 9, a ceremony in Berlin ratified the sur- 
lender terms. Aher five years, eight months, and seven 
days, the European phase of World War II had ended. 



The War in Asia and the Pacific 



War had raged in Asia since 1937, when Japan at- 
tacked China. Chinese and Japanese armies were dead- 
locked by 1940, so Japan turned to other areas. In 
September of that year, its troops marched into French 
Indochina as part of the campaign to build a "Greater 
East .\sia Co-Prosperity Sphere" similar to Hitler's 
"New Order" in Europe. By 1942, the Japanese had 
overrun Burma, Malaya, the Netherlands East Indies, 
the Philippines, and Thailand. Japan's steady expan- 
sion came to a halt in the summer of 1942. After a series 
of island-hopping campaigns, air bombardments, and 
submarine attacks, the Allies forced Japan to surrender 
unconditionally on Sept. 2, 1945, and end \\orld War II. 

Early Japanese Victories 

Japan Sweeps Ahead. Within a few hours after 
attacking Pearl Harbor on Dec. 7, 1941, Japanese 
bombers struck at American bases on the islands of 
Guam, Midway, and Wake. They also bombed Manila 
and Singapore. More than 56,000 Japanese troops under 
Lt. Gen. Masaharu Homma landed on Luzon in the 
Philippines between December to and 22. Hong Kong, 
defended largely by Canadians, was seized. The Japa- 
nese also occupied Guam and Wake islands. 

Instead of storming the stronghold of Singapore by 
sea, as the British expected, Japanese forces advanced 
through the thick jungles of the Malay Peninsula and 



attacked the city from the rear. On Feb. 16, 1942, the 
British surrendeied Singapore to Japan. 

Japanese troops quickly overran New Britain, New- 
Ireland, and the .Admiralty and Solomon islands. The 
Japanese routed an Allied fleet in the Battle of the Java 
■Sea, opening their way to the Netherlands East Indies. 

Burma and the Philippines fell to Japan early in 
1942. As the invaders approached, Gen. Douglas Mac- 
Arthur, commander of L'.S. Army Forces in the Far 
East, declared Manila an open city. He withdrew- his 
troops to the Bataan Peninsula. Ihe enemy entered 
Manila on January 2. American and Philippine troops 
in Bataan stoutly resisted Japanese assaults. On March 
1 1, MacArthur left the Philippines by torpedo boat at 
Piesident Roosevelt's order, then Hew to Australia to 
command the Southwest Pacific Area. He put Lt. Gen. 
Jonathan M. Wainwright in charge of the defenders of 
Bataan, and promised the Filipinos: "I shall return." 
The shortage of food and medical supplies forced 
Wainwright and his men to surrender on April 9. The 
I i,ooo-man garrison on Corregidor, a rocky fortress in 
Manila Bay, held out until May 6. The Japanese forced 
about 40,000 prisoners to march 70 miles to prison 
camps. In the "Bataan Death March," more than half 
the prisoners died from starvation or maltreatment. 

In Burma, the Japanese also met stubborn resistance. 
The country had rich resources of oil and tin. By con- 

United Press Int. 



GERMAN 
SURRENDER 



Unconditional Surrender 

of German forces come on 
May 7, 1945, at Allied head- 
quarters in Reims, France. Alfred 
Jodl, center, signed for the 
German High Command. 





quering Burma, the Japanese could close the Burma 
Road, the last land route open to China. The British 
evacuated Rangoon on March 7. Chinese troops under 
Lt. Gen. Joseph VV. Stilwell tried to hold Mandalay and 
protect the Burma Road, but the Japanese were too 
strong. Stilwell and a handful of his men tramped 
through 140 miles of mountains and jungles to India. 

The Allies Strike Back 

Hit-and-Run Raids. After Japan conquered the west- 
ern and southern Pacific, it expected the Allies to seek 
peace. But the Japanese soon realized that the Allies 
would never allow them to keep their newly-conquered 
territories. Early in 1942, a U.S. carrier task force 
raided the Marshall, Gilbert, and Marcus islands. On 
April 18, a fleet of 16 B-25 army bombers led by Lt. Col. 
James H. Doolittle took off from the carrier Hornet, 
about 650 miles east of Honshu, Japan. The bombers 
hit Tokyo and other cities. The raid astounded the 
Japanese, because they had believed that Allied planes 
could never reach their homeland. Fifteen of Doolittle's 
planes crashed when they ran out of fuel and could not 
reach bases in China. One landed in Siberia. The 
Chinese underground helped Doolittle and 63 of his 
fliers to escape. The Japanese executed eight fliers. 

The Battle of the Coral Sea. The Doolittle raid helped 
convince the Japanese that they would have to expand 
their defense boundaries. They planned to seize Port 
Moresby in southeastern New Guinea. Then they hoped 
to cut Allied shipping lanes to Australia, and perhaps 
even invade Austraha. But Rear Adm. Frank J. 
Fletcher's task force intercepted a Japanese fleet headed 
for Port Moresby in the Coral Sea. The two forces 
fought a four-day battle from May 4 to 8, in which air- 
craft did all the fighting. The battle was an important 
Allied strategic victory. It blocked Japan's push south- 
eastward and ended its threat to Port Moresby. 

The Battle of Midway. The most important objectives 
in Japan's resumed offensive were the capture of Mid- 
way Island and of the Aleutian Islands, west of Alaska. 
Midway lies 1,000 miles northwest of Hawaii. Yama- 
moto hoped that, by seizing Midway, he could draw 
the Pacific Fleet away from Hawaii and win a decisive 
victory with his larger, stronger force. 

Before the Batde of Midway, the United States scored 



one of the greatest triumphs of the war by cracking 
Japan's naval code. This feat enabled Adm. Chester W. 
Nimitz, who had succeeded Kimmel as commander in 
chief of the Pacific Fleet, to know about Yamamoto's 
plans in advance. On June 4, 1942, aircraft from the 
100-ship Japanese fleet began blasting Midway. Nimitz' 
task force commanders, Rear Admirals Frank J . Fletcher 
and Raymond A. Spruance, launched aircraft from the 
carriers Entfiprise, Hornet, and Torktown. At the end of 
the two-day battle, Japan had lost four carriers and a 
major part of its air arm. Enemy submarines sank the 
Torktown. The Battle of Midway proved to be one of the 
most decisive victories in history. It ended Japanese 
threats to Hawaii and to the United States. 

Although Japan failed to seize Midway, its troops 
occupied Kiska and Attn, at the tip of the Aleutian 
chain, on June 7. In July, they captured Agattu. Japan 
had no plans to attack Alaska. In the spring of 1943, 
U.S. troops drove the Japanese from Attu and tlie 
enemy withdrew from Agattu and Kiska. 

The South Pacific 

Allied strategy in the South Pacific had three major 
objectives: (!) to recapture the Philippines, (2) to cut 
Japan's lines of communications with its overseas bases, 
and (3) to set up bases from which to attack Japan it- 
self. But first the Allies had to capture or neutralize 
Rabaul, an important enemy base on New Britain 
Island, north of Australia. They planned an invasion of 
the nearby Solomon Islands, while other Allied forces 
approached Rabaul by way of New Guinea. 

Guadalcanal. On Aug. 7, 1942, the Allies began their 
first offensive action in the Pacific. U.S. Marines under 
Maj. Gen. Alexander A. Vandegrift landed on Gua- 
dalcanal in the Solomon Islands. The fighting was 
bitter, and control of the island seesawed for several 
months. In February, 1943, army troops under Maj. 
Gen. Alexander M. Patch finally cleared Guadalcanal. 
By November, other Allied forces had advanced up the 
Solomons chain to Bougainville Island. 

The Allies learned many lessons during the Solomons 
campaign. They gradually perfected the technique of 
amphibious warfare, which involved air, land, and sea 
forces working as a team. Allied soldiers encountered 
the fanatical code of biishitlo, which requires Japanese 



400 




WAR IN THE 
PACIFIC 

A Convoy escorted by Allied war- 
ships dots the Pacific os it steams 
toward an enemy-held island. Ships 
brought in troops and supplies. 



Antiaircraft Guns, carried as car- 
go, blast away on a convoy run, 
Japanese kamikazes, or suicide 
planes, flew into Allied ships, causing 
much damage. 



U.S. .N'avy; Unilt-d Press Int. 

soldiers to fight to the death. The Japanese believed 
that surrender meant disgrace, and often preferred sui- 
cide to capture. They mistreated many Allied prisoners. 

In the Solomons, the Allies fought the first of many 
jungle campaigns. Heavy rains made roads unusable. 
Troops waded knee deep through thick, black mud. In 
the green half-light, soldiers often could not distinguish 
their own battle lines from the enemy's. Malaria and 
other jungle diseases took a terrific toll. Japanese snipers 
lurked even-where. Giant leeches and scorpions were 
constant menaces. 

New Guinea. Japanese bases in New Guinea threat- 
ened .\llicd airfields in Australia. Late in 1942. Japan 
launched an overland campaign against the .Mlied base 
at Port Moresby. Its troops came within 32 miles of the 
town. American. .Australian, and Dutch forces then 
took the offensi\e. 

Allied troops under MacArthur inched their way to 
Buna. Gona. Salamaua. and Lae, the main enemy posi- 
tions in New Guinea. But Japanese planes based on 
nearby Rabaul continued to attack Allied shipping. 

Encirclement. In December, 1943, Allied troops 
landed on the nearby island of Xew Britain. After brief 
enemy resistance, the Admiralty Islands fell to the 
Allies in March. 1944. 

Allied forces continued to make a series of jumps in 
their march up the New Guinea coast. The\' invaded 
such important bases as Aitape (April 22). Hollandia 
(April 22). Wakde (May 17), and Biak (May 27). 

Island Hopping 

While Allied forces in the .South Pacific followed one 
road toward Japan, .\llied forces in the Central Pacific 
took another route. The Japanese Empire had reached 
its height in August. 1942. It controlled the Gilbert. 
Marshall, Caroline, and Mariana islands diat stretched 
halfway across the Pacific. These islands served as '"un- 
sinkable aircraft carriers." bases for airplanes. 

Allied strategists believed that the central Pacific 
fortress of Japan could be cracked. They did not intend 
to seize each island separately. This would be too cosilv 
and take too long. Instead, they decided on a plan of 
island hopping, or seizing key islands from which to 
attack the next target, bypassing other targets. 

Tarawa. Nimitz selected the Gilbert Islands as the 



first major objective in his island-hopping campaign. 
On Nov. 20. 1943. Spruance"s Central Pacific Force 
(later Fifth Fleet) landed U.S. Marines on Tarawa and 
army troops at Makin. Makin fell in three days. 

The marines encountered fierce opposition and an 
intricate system of fortifications on Tarawa. The Japa- 
nese had studded the island with barricades, concrete 
pillbo.xes, gun emplacements, and bombproof under- 
ground shelters. The\' had been ordered to resist to the 
bitter end. Of the 3.000 enemy troops and 1,800 civilian 
laborers on the island, the marines captured only 147 
Japanese and Koreans alive. The United States suffered 
3.1 10 casualties in one of the wars most savage battles. 

Kwajalein, the world's largest coral atoll, lies in the 
central Marshall Islands. Injanuar\', 1944, Rear Adm. 
Marc .A. Mitscher's Task Force 58 began a series of 
raids on Japanese bases in the Marshalls. His command 
included the U.S. Navy's fastest carriers, battleships, 



401 



^-*9 



HIGHLIGHTS OF THE WAR IN ASIA AND THE PACIFIC 




Attacked (December, 1941). Japan's 
conquests included Indochina, Monchuria, and ports of China. 




Japan's Empire at Its Height (August, 1942) stretched 
_ from the Netherlands East Indies to parts of the Aleutians. 




•\^ 



Surrender (August, 1945). When Japon surrendered, 
ending World War II, it still occupied ports of eastern Asia. 



Sept 


18 


Ji'iy 


7 


.Sept 


22 


.Apr. 


13 


June 


8 


Aug. 
Dec. 


25 
7 


Dec. 


8 


Dec. 


9 


Dec. 


10 


Dec. 


23 


Dec. 


25 


Jan. 


2 


j.m 


II 


Icb. 


1 


Keb. 


15 


Feb. 


27 


Mar. 


7 


Apri 
Apr. 
May 
May 
June 


1 9 
18 
4-8 
6 
4-6 


.\un 


7 


Mar. 


2-5 


Mar. 


13 


May 


30 


Oct. 


2 


Nov. 


1 


No\- 


20 


Nov. 


22 


Jan. 
Feb. 


31 
17 


Feb. 


29 


Mar. 


22 


Apr. 
June 


22 
15 


June 


15 


June 


19-20 


July 

Sept 
Oct. 


21 
15 

20 


Oct. 


23-26 


Jan. 
Jan. 


9 
22 


Feb. 


19 


Apr. 

Aug 


1 
6 


.Vug 
Aug 


9 
10 


Aug 
Sept 
Sept 
Sept 


14 
2 
8 
12 



1931 

Japan invaded Manchuria in North China. 
1937 

Japan invaded China. 
1940 

Japan pushed into French Indochina. 
1941 

Japan and Russia signed a non-aggression 
pact. 

British and French troops invaded Syria. 

Russian and British forces invaded Iran. 

The Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor. 

The United States declared war on Japan. 

China declared war on Germany, Italy, 
and Japan. 

Guam surrendered to the Japanese. 

Wake Island surrendered to the Japanese. 

British troops at Hong Kong surrendered. 
1942 

Manila fell to invading Japanese forces. 

The Japanese landed in the Netherlands 
East Indies. 

U.S. ships raided the Marshalls and Gil- 
berts. 

Singapore surrendered to the Japanese. 

The .Allies lost the Battle of Java .Sea. 

The Japanese occupied the Netherlands 
East Indies. 

Bataan surrendered to the Japanese. 

U.S. carrier-based aircraft bombed Tokyo. 

The .Allies won the Battle of the Coral Sea. 

The Japanese occupied Corregidor. 

The Battle of Midway ended Japan's ex- 
pansion eastward. 

U.S. marines landed on Guadalcanal. 
1943 

U.S. warships defeated a Japanese naval 
force m the Battle of the Bismarck Sea. 

Japanese troops retreated across the 
Yangtze. 

Organized Japanese resistance on .Attn 
ended. 

Allied forces captured Finschafen. 

U.S. troops landed on Bougainville Island. 

U.S. marines invaded Tarawa and Makin. 

The Allies conferred at Cairo in Egypt. 
1944 

U.S. troops attacked Kwajalcin atoll. 

U.S. naval forces raided Truk Island. 

Allied soldiers landed in the Admiralties. 

Japanese troops crossed the border of India. 

Allied forces landed at HoUandia. 

U.S. marines invaded Saipan Island. 

B-29 .Superfortresses raided Japan. 

U.S. forces won the Battle of the Philippine 
Sea. 

U.S. troops landed on Guam Island. 

U..S. marines invaded Peleliu Island. 

U.S. Army forces landed on Leyte. 

The U.S. Pacific Fleet crushed the Japa- 
nese fleet in the Battle for Leyte Gulf. 
1945 

Allied troops invaded Luzon, Philippines. 

The .Allies reopened a land route to China. 

U.S. marines stormed Iwo Jima Island. 

U.S. troops landed on Okinawa Island. 

U.S. dropped an atomic bomb on Hiro- 
shima. 

An atomic bomb fell on Nagasaki. 

Japan opened peace negotiations. 

Japan accepted the Allied surrender terms. 

Japan signed the terms of surrender. 

Japanese forces in China surrendered. 

Japanese troops in Southeast Asia sur- 
rendered. 



PACIFIC THEATER 



} 



"A 



ir 
^■. 

i: 
/• 

V--V 
.+•■ 



RUSSIA 



■■•N. 



■—■/ 



CHINA 



china Invai 
July 7, ]93r 



ide/^ %: 



•x.-..\ 

INDIA 



^ -I 

Manchuria Invaded .••'/ 
Sept. 18, I93I ;/ 
. /( 
.•■ ' ^ -' 

•••■■■" KOREA JAPAN 

Halsey-Ooolittle 
Raid on Japan Tokyo 
April 18, 1942 • ■ 

/ Hiroshima W 

I Aug. 4, IWS ^ B-29 Air Raids 

'. Nagasaki 

/ Aug. 9, 1945 

RYUKYU ISLANDS 




•^ ALEUTIAN 
■ \ ISLANDS 



urrender in Tokyo Bay 
Sept. 2, 1945 



June 15, 1944-Aug., 1945 



/ Midway '^'■ 
I June 4^, 1942 " 



J.-- 



w 



^BpRMA:;. 



Hong Konj 



Okinawa 
Apr. I-June 21, 1945 



PAC I F I C jHAWAIIAN ISLANDS 

OCEAN ' ,v;; 



'&lt;i^ Burma :.•"" 
Jan. 18-May 13, 1942 



I 



Hong Kong 
Dec. 8-25, 1941 

;...'. French Indochino Invaded ^ '^''"" 
fHAILANb Sep,. 22, 1940 , O.t^, 1944.F.b. 6, 1945 

■■'LOCK,ru «"&lt;■"''" * W Philippine Sea 

Tf leyte Gulf 
PHILIPPINE Oct. 23-26, 1944 



BONIN ISLANDS 
^ VOLCANO ISLANDS 
Iwo Jima 
Feb. 19-Mar. 16, 1945 



I " ■• 
\ 

Wake Island 
Dec. 23, 1941 



Pearl Harbor 
Dec. 7, 1941 



MARIANA ISLANDS 



Guam 
July 21-Aug. 10, 1944 



\ 
\ 
MARSHALL ISLANDS 



ISLANDS 



PAUU ISLANDS 



Kwajalein 
Jon. 31-Feb. 7, 1944 



\ 



\ 



MALAYA 



\ 'i^Singopore BORNEO 

\ Singapore 

Dec. 8, 1941-Feb. 15, 1942 
\ 

\ *^" ybs, ■'■"" '"■ 

Netherlands tost Indies '^^eb. 27, 1942 

Jon. 11-Mor. 7, 1942^ 

NETHERUNDS 
EAST INDIES --- _--■' 



Pelelio , 

Sept. 15-Oct. 13, 1944 &gt; 

' , GILBERT ISUNDS 

#Bisniarck SeoCAROLINE ISUNDS ^ •. 

Mor. 2-5, 1943 Torowo*^ j 

W Hollondio Nov. 20-23, 1943 / 

Apr. 22-Jun» 6, 1944 / 

"' " mlv/ . ■^' Bougoinville --• 



GUINEA 



Nov. 1-24, 1943^ -^ 
^^.Guadalcanal ^^.SOLOMON ISLANDS 
Aug. 7, 1942-Feb. 8, 1943 

Coral Seo 
Moy 4-8, 1942 



AUSTRALIA 




THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN 



Allied Victory 
# Japanese Victory 




WORLD WAR II 

and cruisers. It operated as part of the 1,200-ship Cen- 
tral Pacific Force. The carriers launched hundreds of 
nav)' planes, including the Corsair, Dauntless, and Hellcat. 

Marines and infantrymen landed on Kwajalein and 
Majuro on January 31, and occupied the two atolls after 
a week's fighting. Eniwetok atoll, 360 miles northwest 
of Kwajalein, came under Allied control on February q i . 

Saipan. The Mariana Islands lay within long-range 
bomber distance of Japan. The army air forces had de- 
veloped B-29 superfortress bombers that were half again 
as large as the B-17 bombers being used to blast Ger- 
many. It wanted bases in the Central Pacific for these 
bombers. The four biggest islands of the Marianas — Sai- 
pan, Tinian, Rota, and Guam — lie at the southern end. 

Vice Adm. Richmond K. Turner's amphibious forces 
landed troops on Saipan on June 15. Lt. Gen. Holland 
M. Smith directed the marine and army forces. His 
troops finally occupied Saipan on July 9, after suffering 
about 14,000 casualties. They killed more than 28,000 
enemy soldiers in the battle. 

Japanese carriers went into action for the first time 
since early 1943. In the Battle of the Philippine Sea on 
June 19-20, near Guam, the Japanese lost 395 carrier 
planes. Tinian fell to the Allies in late July. 

Army and marine forces under Maj. Gen. Roy S. 
Geiger invaded Guam on July 2 1 . The Japanese fought 
bitterly. More than 10,000 of them died before Geiger 
announced on August 10 that organized resistance had 
ended. American casualties in Guam totaled 7,800. 

The army air forces promptly built huge bases in the 
Marianas for B-29 bombers. The first superfortress raid 
on Japan from these bases came on November 24. Pre- 
mier Hideki Tojo of Japan could not face criticism for 
the loss of Saipan, and resigned. 

Return to the Philippines 

With the Marianas occupied. Allied forces stood 



within 1 ,600 miles of Tokyo and Manila. In prepara- 
tion for attacks on the Philippines and Japan, Adm. 
William F. Halsey's Third Fleet put to sea. Vice Adm. 
John .S. McCain commanded his fast carrier task forces. 

On .September 15, marines landed on Peleliu in the 
Palau Islands. Army troops attacked Morotai Island in 
the Netherlands East Indies. Conquest of the two islands 
put the Allies within 400 miles of the Philippines. 

Landings on Leyte. Air, ground, and naval forces had 
all worked together to bring the Allies to the Philip- 
pines. On October 20, Lt. Gen. Walter Krueger's U.S. 
Sixth Army won two beaches on the central island of 
Leyte. It faced a 270,000-man Japanese army and air 
force in the Philippines, commanded by Field Marshal 
Count Hisaichi Terauchi. MacArthur and his staff 
waded ashore at Tacloban about five hours after the 
first landings. He had kept his promise to return. By 
December, the .Sixth Army had occupied Leyte. 

The Battle for Leyte Golf. The Japanese Navy de- 
cided to muster its remaining strength to try to drive the 
Allies from Leyte. The Battle for Leyte Gulf was the 
biggest naval engagement in history from the stand- 
point of naval tonnage involved. It consisted of actions 
in four separate areas: (i) in the .Sibuyan Sea, (2) in 
Suriago Strait, (3) off Samar, and (4) off Cape Engano. 

The Japanese planned to send their northern force 
under Adm. Jisaburo Ozawa south from Japan. They 
wanted to lure the Third Fleet toward this force and 
away from the Philippines. Adm. Takeo Kurita's cen- 
tral force would sail east from Borneo through the San 
Bernardino Strait and head for Leyte Gulf Vice Adm. 
Shoji Nishimura and a southern force would sail from 
Borneo and drive for Surigao Strait, south of Leyte. 
Vice Adm. Kiyohide Shima's attack force would pro- 
ceed south from the Pescadores Islands and join with 
the other ships to attack the Leyte beachheads. 

Sibuyan Sea. The Battle for Leyte Gulf began on 
October 23, when U.S. submarines torpedoed two 
cruisers in Kurita's force. The following morning, fliers 



Dept. of Defense 




TARAWA 

U.S. Marines crawled up a 
shell-raked beachhead on Ta- 
rawa in the Gilberts. The Allies' 
island-hopping campaign be- 
gan with landings in the Solo- 
mon Islands in August, 1942. 



Pacific Ocean 



IRELAND 



JOUGAINVIUE %v 
^GUADALCANAl 



« ^ • 




wide World 



Shells Burst around American carriers in the Battle for Leyte Gulf 
in 1944, A weak Japanese force (black line) lured one U.S. fleet 
north (dotted line) as other forces steamed toward Leyte Gulf. 



from Halsey's Third Fleet spotted Kuiita's ships near 
the Sibuyan Sea and Nishimura's force to the south 
near the Mindanao Sea. They attacked the central 
force and sank an enemy battleship. They then sighted 
Ozawa's warships steaming southward. Halsey decided 
to attack Ozawa and leave the San Bernardino Strait 
unguarded. He felt that his fleet could dash back to the 
strait if Kurita tried to go through it. The Japanese suc- 
ceeded in drawing him north to Ozawa's force. 

Surigao Strait. Kurita turned eastward, slipped 
through San Bernardino Strait, and headed toward 
Leyte Gulf. Offshore, Vice Adm. Thomas C. Kinkaid's 
Seventh Fleet stood guard. When Kinkaid learned that 
Nishimura's southern force was approaching the gulf 
through Surigao Strait to the south, he formed a task 
force under Rear Adm. Jesse B. Oldendorf to block the 
strait. As Nishimura's warships sailed up the strait, 
OldendorPs warships sank two enemy battleships and 
four destroyers. 

Samar. As Kurita steamed southward along the Samar 
coast, he came upon a Seventh Fleet escort carrier task 
group. The Japanese forces got to within three hours' 
sail from Leyte Gulf and sank an Allied escort carrier 
and two destroyers, but then retired northward. 

Cape Erigano. As the Seventh Fleet battled off .Samar, 
Halsey's Third Fleet pursued Ozawa's force, which had 
swung north. His battleships came within 45 miles of 
the enemy. After Kinkaid appealed for help, Halsey 
ordered some fast battleships and carriers to turn south. 
But he lost all chances of destroying the northern force. 
The Third Fleet raced back to San Bernardino Strait, 
too late to wipe out the remainder of Kurita's force. 

The Battle for Leyte Gulf was a decisive victory for 
the United States. At the end of the battle on October 
26, Japan had lost 3 battleships, 4 carriers, 10 cruisers, 
and 9 destroyers, almost its entire fleet. The Allies lost 3 
carriers, 2 destroyers, and a destroyer escort. In despera- 
tion, the Japanese began on October 25 to strike with 



kamikazes, or suicide planes. Enemy fliers flew their 
planes into Allied warships, knowing they would be 
killed (see Kamikaze). 

On to Manila. The Eighth Army under Lt. Gen. 
Robert L. Eichelberger took over mop-up operations on 
Leyte. On Jan. 9, 1945, the Sixth Army landed in 
Lingaycn Gulf, about 1 10 miles north of Manila on the 
island of Luzon. Third Fleet carriers roamed the South 
China Sea with almost no opposition, cutting Japan's 
last supply line with its empire in the south. 

Japanese troops fiercely resisted the Allied advance 
toward Manila, and destroyed part of the Philippine 
capital. By the end of Febaiary, the Allies had largely 
cleared Manila and Luzon of enemy forces. However, 
scattered Japanese resistance continued in the Philip- 
pines until the end of the war. 

The China-Burma-India Theater 

Control of the Philippines gave the Allies another 
base from which they could invade the Japanese-held 
Chinese mainland. .Some Allied strategists favored using 
the Philippines as a direct springboard to Japan. But 
they also felt that China had to be kept in the war. The 
Chinese pinned down thousands of Japanese troops. 

Burma played a vital role in the Allied plan of keep- 
ing China in the war. War materials to China had once 
flowed over the Burma Road (see Burma Road). After 
Japan seized Burma, it promptly cut off the road. In 
1943, the Allies began a campaign to reopen the road 
and restore land communications with China. They 
hoped to drive through northern Burma and build a 
road that would connect the railway in northeast India 
with the Chinese end of the old Burma Road. This road 
was completed in January, 1945. It became known as 
the Ledo Road, and later as the Stilwell Road (see 
Stilwell Road). 

American, British, and Chinese troops in northern 
Burma had to hack through thick jungles and climb 



405 



ii^^tfpii^ "mi' 



^' 



zsL-^r 







THE ROAD 
TO JAPAN 



Supplies pile up on Iwo Jima 
Island as U.S. Marines push in- 
land. The bloody Iwo campaign 
was one of the last major land 
battles in the Pacific. 



! 



Hiroshima lay in ruins after 
the Allies blasted the city with 
an atomic bomb on Aug. 6, 
1945. A second atomic bomb 
destroyed Nagasaki on Aug. 9. 



Widt? World; United Press In 



Steep mountains. The Allies organized guerrilla groups, 
including Merrill's Marauders and Wingate's Raiders 
(see Merrill's Mar.^uders; Wingate's R.mders). 
Stilwell's Chinese troops advanced south, seeking to 
hold the Chinese end of the Burma Road. 

The Japanese tried to cut the new Ledo Road. Early 
in 1944, they began a drive to capture Allied airfields 
in northeast India. American, British, Chinese, and 
Indian troops halted their advances. Heavy rains, tropi- 
cal diseases, and a shortage of supplies also hindered the 
Japanese. On Feb. 4, 1945. the fiist Allied convoy rolled 
into China over the Stilwell Road. British Common- 
wealth forces recaptured Mandalay on March 20. and 
forced the Japanese to evacuate Rangoon on May 3. 

China had been isolated from most of the world when 
the Japanese cut the Burma Road. Supplies could come 
only through the air. The U..S. Air Transport Command 
flew the dangerous 500-mile route, known as the Hump, 
over the Himalaya Mountains between Assam in India 
and the Yunnan plateau in western China. 

In the early 1940's, the United States began building 
air bases in China. The American Volunteer Group, 
known as the Flying Tigers, became a full-fledged air 
force under Maj. Gen. Claire L. Chennault. In 1944. 
the Japanese began a determined drive to capture Allied 
air bases. They drove south in Hunan province, past 
Changsha to Hangchou. Turning southwest, they 
seized most of the major airfields there. The Japanese 
also captured the important bases of Liuchow and 
Kweilin. At one point, they swept to within 200 
miles of the Chinese wartime capital of Chungking. 
But they pushed ahead faster than their supply lines 
could move, and had to retreat. By early 1945, Chinese 
forces had regained most of the lost territory. 

Target Tokyo 

Allied strategy to end the war called for an invasion 
of Japan with the code name of Operation Olympic. It 
would be launched from islands near Japan, or from 
bases in China and Korea. Allied warships would con- 
tinue to raid Japanese shipping and coastal areas, and 
Allied bombers would increase their attacks. 

Air Attacks on Japan by long-range B-29 bombers 
had begun on June 15, 1944, from bases in China. The 




superfortresses bombed steel mills at Yawata. Through- 
out the summer of 1944. the U.S. Twentieth .Air Force 
raided Japan, Formosa, and Japanese-held Manchuria 
about once a week. B-29's in the Marianas joined with 
bombers based in China to raid Tokyo on November 24. 
In March, 1945. B-29's commanded by Maj. Gen. 
Curtis E. LeMa\' began incendiary bombing at night 
from a low altitude of about 7,000 feet. This allowed 
bombers to carry a heavier bomb load, because they 
did not need so much gasoline. As many as 800 super- 
fortresses took part in these attacks. Three raids wiped 
out the heart of Tokyo, and one attack destroyed most 
of Yokohama. The army air forces flew more than 
15,000 missions against 66 major Japanese cities, and 
dropped more than 100,000 tons of incendiary bombs. 
The Allies held such superiority in the air that early 
in July, 1945, Gen. Carl Spaatz, who assumed com- 
mand of the U.S. Army Strategic Air Forces in the Pa- 
cific after the war ended in Europe, publicly an- 



406 



nounccd in advance the names of cities to be bombed. 

The Sea Road. Naval aircraft joined in raids on Japa- 
nese cities and transportation. Without sliips, Japan 
could not Ions; survive. It needed ships to link the wide- 
spread parts of its empire, and to transport troops and 
supplies. Allied submarines increased their activity in 
Japanese coastal waters, where they had been operating 
since 1942. By 1945, Japan's shipping tonnage had been 
reduced to about 1,500,000 tons, compared with 10,- 
000,000 tons early in 1942. Submarines accounted for 
more than half of Japan's losses in merchant ships. 

In April, 1945, carrier planes operating in the East 
China .Sea sank the Japanese battleship Yamato, the 
largest warship built up to that time. The U.S. Third 
Fleet, joined by the British Pacific Fleet, moved to 
within a few miles of Japan to bombard its cities. 

Iwo Jima lay halfway between Guam and Japan. 
Capture of this tiny, ash-covered island in the \'olcano 
Island chain would place the Allies within 750 miles 
of Tokyo. For seven months before the invasion, the 
army air forces and nav)' bombed or shelled the island 
almost daily. The Japanese built a system of concrete 
fortifications and underground defenses on Iwo Jima. 

On Feb. 19, 1945, Maj. Gen. Harry Schmidt's Fifth 
Marine Amphibious Corps landed on Iwo Jima. The 
60,000 marines met savage opposition from the troops 
of Lt. Gen. Tadamichi Kuribayashi. On February 23. 
marines scaled the steep slopes of Mount Suribachi and 
hoisted the American flag. In Nimitz' words, "imcom- 
mon valor was a common virtue" during the 26 days of 
heav)' fighting before Iwo fell to the Allies on March 16. 
The marines and the nav\' killed more than 20.000 
enemy troops at the cost of almost 5,000 killed. 

Okinawa. The Joint Chiefs of Staff selected Okinawa 
as the next step on the road to Tokyo. This island in 
the RvTik^Tas chain lies about 350 miles from Kyushu, 
the soutliern Japanese home island. Its capture would 
provide a base for landings in China or Japan. 

On Easter Sunday, April 1, 1945, two corps of anny 



WORLD WAR II 

and marine troops under Lt. Gen. Simon B. Buckner, Jr., 
invaded Okinawa. The Japanese fought desperately. 
Their air force launched about 6,000 kamikazes. By the 
end of the campaign in mid-June, these suicide planes 
had sunk 36 vessels and damaged 332 others. Organized 
enemy resistance on the island ended on June 21. Dur- 
ing the ground fighting, Buckner was killed. The Allies 
had suffered 40,000 casualties, and the Japanese, more 
than 109,000. The fighting on Okinawa proved to be 
the last major land battle of the war. 

Invasion Plans. The .Allies had cut all sea communi- 
cations leading to Japan. They planned to invade the 
southern Japanese home island, Knishu, in November, 
This invasion, given the code name Operation Olympic, 
was to be followed in March. 1946, with an assault on 
the Tokyo plain of eastern Honshu, the main home 
island. The landings in Japan would have involved 
ground forces under Mac.\rthur and naval forces under 
Nimitz, with .Spaatz directing the strategic air forces. 

In July, 1945, the heads of government in Britain, 
Russia, and the United States conferred at Potsdam, 
Germany. .Stalin reported that he had received a mes- 
sage indicating Japan's willingness to negotiate a peace 
and unwillingness to accept unconditional surrender. 
On July 26, the heads of state of the United States, 
Great Britain, and China issued an ultimatum calling 
for unconditional surrender and a just peace. They 
planned to occupy Japan, restrict Japanese authority 
to the home islands, disarm the country, and bring its 
war criminals to trial. When Japan ignored the ultima- 
tum, the United States decided to use the atomic bomb. 

The Atomic Bomb helped make an invasion of Japan 
unnecessary. On August 6, a B-29 called "Enola Gay" 
dropped the first atomic bomb used in warfare, de- 
stroying 4.7 square miles in Hiroshima (see Atomic 
Bomb). On .'\ugust 9, another atomic bomb destroyed 
1.8 square miles in Nagasaki. The two attacks killed 

L'nited Press Int. 




407 



WORLD WAR II 

more than 100.000 persons and injured about 1 10,000. 

On August 8, the Ru.ssians had declared war on 
Japan, and invaded Manchuria. They met little op- 
position, because many Japanese troops had been 
moved to other fronts. They also occupied the Japanese 
half of Sakhalin Island, north of Japan, 

Victory in the Pacific. On August 10, the Japanese 
government asked the Allies if unconditional surrender 
meant that Emperor Hirohito would have to give up his 
throne. The Allies replied that the Japanese people 



would decide his fate. On August 14 (in the United 
States), the Allies received a message from Japan ac- 
cepting surrender. The Allies appointed MacArthur su- 
preme commander for the Allied Powers. 

On September 2 (Tokyo time), aboard the battleship 
Missouri in Tokyo Bay, the Allies and Japan signed the 
surrender agreement. MacArthur signed for the Allied 
Powers, Nimitz for the United .States, and Foreign 
Minister Mamoru .Shigemitsu for Japan. President Tru- 
man proclaimed September 2 as V-J (Victory Over 
Japan) Day. Three years, eight months, and 22 days 
after Japan bombed Pearl Harbor, World War II ended. 



The Secret War 



Armies of men and women fought behind the battle 
lines throughout World War II. Spies sought to steal 
secrets from other governments. .Saboteurs tried to dis- 
rupt transportation and production on the home front. 
Underground resistance movements harassed occupa- 
tion troops and supported the invaders. Psychological- 
warfare experts tried to win the battle for the minds of 
men with propaganda. 

Spies and Saboteurs 

Most countries operated networks of men and women 
engaged in espionage and sabotage. The Germans landed 
eight saboteurs on the east coast of the United States 
in June, 1942. The Federal Bureau of Investigation 
arrested all eight. Six were executed and two were given 
prison terms after a trial by a military court. 

The Germans bought secret information from a spy 
called "Cicero," who was employed in the British Em- 
bassy in Turkey. Richard Sorge, a Communist agent, 
worked in the German Embass)' in Tokyo. For nine 
years, he directed a Russian spy ring before the Japa- 
nese police caught him in 1941. The Russians also op- 
erated an espionage ring in the United States and 
Canada to steal secrets on the development of the 
atomic bomb. Norwegian and British commandos 
scored one of the great sabotage triumphs of the war 
when they destroyed Germany's secret heavy-water 
plant in Norway. The water could have been used with 
uranium to make atomic bombs. See Espionage. 

The Office of Strategic Services (OSS), a wartime 
agency of the United States government, trained its 
own spies, conducted sabotage, and worked with un- 
derground movements. OSS agents secretly radioed re- 
ports on enemy troop movements and defenses. Their 
activities ranged from stealing the German plans for re- 
sisting an Allied invasion of North Africa to organizing 
Burmese guerrilla fighters against the Japanese. 

Underground Resistance 

Underground resistance movements sprang up in 
every occupied country. Many patriots "went under- 
ground" to hide. They derailed trains and blew up 



bridges, passed out illegal new-spapers and leaflets, and 
killed cnem)' officials. At first, most attacks were spon- 
taneous and performed by individuals. Later, huge or- 
ganizations developed, including the French Forces of the 
Interior, or matjuis, which helped .Allied operations in 
occupied France, and the Polish Home Army, which re- 
belled unsuccessfully in Warsaw. Partisan and Chetnik 
forces won large areas of Yugoslavia. Underground 
fighters in German-occupied Russia rose Up in the for- 
ests and maishlands to carry on guerrilla warfare and 
sabotage. Resistance leaders rescued Allied fliers, hid 
spies and saboteurs, and cooperated with the Allied 
armed forces in other ways. 

Psychological Warfare 

The use of propaganda to hurt the enemy's morale 
reached a high state of development during World War 
II. Psychological-warfare teams went with Allied 
armies as they pushed foi-ward. They used propaganda 
to create disunitN' in the enemy and confidence in their 
own forces. Their tools included public address sys- 
tems, radios, loudspeakers, and mobile printing presses. 

Allied propaganda agencies included the British 
Ministry of Information and the United States Office 
of War Information (OWI). The OWI operated radio 
stations in Europe and the Pacific. In attempts to de- 
stroy morale on the enemy home front, the OWI, the 
British Broadcasting Corporation, and Radio Moscow 
made long-range propaganda broadcasts. Paul Joseph 
Goebbels, German minister of propaganda, fought back 
with short-wave broadcasts. The Japanese broadcast 
propaganda over Radio Tokyo. 

After the war, the Allies brought to trial a number of 
persons who had served the Axis cause. They included 
William Joyce, who had made propaganda broadcasts 
for Germany and became known as "Lord Haw-Haw." 
A British court found him guilty of treason, and he was 
hanged. Americans convicted of treason and sent to 
prison included Mildred Gillars, who broadcast for the 
Nazis and became known as "Axis Sally," and Iva 
d'Aquino, who made propaganda broadcasts for Japan 
and was known as "Tokyo Rose." 



The Home Front in the United States and Canada 



"The man behind the man behind the gun" helped 
win World War II. People on the home front built 
weapons, produced food and clothing, paid taxes, and 
bought war bonds. The people in the L'nited States and 
Canada did not suffer hardships comparable to those of 

408 



the fighting forces or of peoples in war-torn areas. But 
they provided the tools that gave the Allies victory. 

Producing for War 

Many historians believe that war production was the 



real key to Allied victory. The Allies not only mobilized 
more men and women in their armed forces, but also 
outproduced the Axis in weapons and machinery. The 
avalanche of war materials from the home front in the 
United States alone included 296.429 airplanes, 86,333 
tanks, and 1 1 ,900 ships. 

Converting Industries. Plants in the United States 
and Canada converted from civilian to war production 
with amazing speed. Private industr\- and the govern- 
ment rapidly built new plants. Firms that had made 
vacuum cleaners before the war began to make machine 
guns. Automobile factories turned out airplanes, en- 
gines, and tanks. American organized labor adopted a 
"no-strike" pledge to insure an uninterrupted flow of 
goods. New and old industries expanded. For example, 
Canadian aircraft firms that had manufactured about 
14 airplanes a year were producing 4.000 a year by the 
end of the war. Opportunities for work in war industries 
caused people to move about. Industries on the Pacific 
Coast attracted more than 1,200,000 newcomers. 

Strategic Raw Materials. The United States had vast 
resources of such basic materials as chemicals, coal, cop- 
per, cotton, iron ore, lead, nitrates, petroleum, and 
wool. But it had to import such strategic raw materials 
as antimony, quinine, rubber, silk, and tin. It also 
needed aluminum, cork, graphite, optical glass, and 
platinum. In the late 1930's, the government began 
building stockpilea-of all these raw materials. 

When Japan conquered the Netherlands East Indies 
in 1942, it cut off a source of many strategic materials 
needed by the Allies. The United States and Canada 
began to manufacture synthetic rubber (see Rubber). 
Rayon and nylon replaced silk. Doctors used atabrine 
instead of quinine to control malaria. 

Women in War Work. As men went into the armed 
forces, women took their places in war plants. By 1943, 
more than 2,000,000 women were working in American 
war industries. In shipyards and aircraft plants, "Rosie 
the riveter" became a common sight. In 21 key indus- 
tries, officials discovered that women could perform the 
duties of 8 of every 10 jobs normally done by men. 

In Canada, more than 260,000 women worked in war 
industries. Another 780,000 women worked on farms to 
raise the crops needed by the Allies. Women also took 
part in civil defense and worked with service groups 
such as the American Red Cross. Many served with the 
United Service Organizations (USO) and as nurses' aids. 

Government Controls 

Rationing. Urgent requirements for war materials 
caused many shortages in consumer goods. ^'Iost gov- 
ernments, both Allied and Axis, had to ration the 
amount of consumer goods each person could use (see 
R.^tioning). In the United States, rationed items in- 
cluded meats, butter, sugar, fats, oils, coffee, canned 
foods, shoes, and gasoline. Canada began rationing 
coffee, butter, gasoline, sugar, and tea in 1942, and later 
added meats and preserves. The Canadian government 
also limited the amount of some civilian goods that in- 
dustries could manufacture. 

Price Controls were used with rationing as weapons 
to combat inflation (see Price Control). Congress gave 
the President power to freeze prices, salaries, and wages 
at their levels of Sept. 15, 1942. On July i, 1943, rents 
were frozen. In December, 1941 , Canada established an 



WORLD WAR II 

over-all price ceiling for all retail sales. For the first two 
years of the war, it controlled prices on certain foods, in- 
cluding butter and sugar. The Canadian government 
also froze rents and wages. 

Censorship. Each government warned its people not 
to give away information that might be of value to the 
enemy. Well-known slogans in the United .States in- 
cluded "Loose talk costs lives" and "A slip of the lip 
may sink a ship." The government set up an Office of 
Censorship that had power to censor all communica- 
tions benveen the United States and other countries. A 
Code of Wartime Practices guided newspapers and radio 
stations. Canada centralized its censorship activities un- 
der a Director of Censorship in May, 1942. He con- 
trolled all cable and transoceanic radio messages. 

War Agencies. The U.S. government set up agencies 
to handle such wartime problems as communications, 
economic stabilization, housing, labor, manpower, mo- 
bilization, price controls, rationing, and transportation. 
Canadian agencies handled labor relations, purchasing, 
prices, and manpower. 

The United States and Canada established several 
joint boards to handle problems of food, materials, 
mutual aid, and production. The Joint Board on De- 
fense studied the defense of North America. The two 
governments built the Alaska Highway through north- 
west Canada, and an oil pipeline from the Mackenzie 
Valley to the Yukon Tenitory to supply fuel for U.S. 
troops in Alaska and Canada (see Alaska Highway). 

In 1942, the United .States and other American re- 
publics formed an Inter-American Defense Board to 



On ttie Home Front, the governments of the United States and 
Canada rationed scarce civilian goods to assure fair distribution. 
Civilians were issued ration books allowing them to buy such goods. 




WORLD WAR II 

study measures for collective security. It also set up 
joint defense commissions with Brazil and Mexico. 

Financing the War 

War Loans. The U.S. government conducted seven 
war loans and a victory loan to raise funds for fighting 
the war and for controlling inflation. It sold more than 
$156,893,000,000 in bonds, certificates, notes, and 
stamps to individuals and firms (see Savings Bond). 
Canada's two war loans and nine victory loans raised 
more than $12,000,000,000. It also sold more than 
$370,000,000 in war-savings certificates and stamps. 

Taxation. The United States imposed a special ex- 
cise tax on such luxury products as jewelry and cos- 
metics. The government also levied an excess-profits tax 
on corporations. Canadians paid wartime tax increases 
in customs and excise duties. Canada also taxed luxury 
items and imposed an excess-profits tax on corpora- 
tions. Both income and spending increased tremen- 
dously as the war progressed. In the United States, 
income and e.xcess-profits tax receipts rose from $2,188,- 
757,000 in 1939 to $35,173,051,000 in 1945. Govern- 
ment expenditures amounted to $8,765,338,000 in 
1939. and $100,404,597,000 in 1945. 

Security Measures 

Civil Defense. The U.S. government set up a civil- 
defense system to protect the country from attack (see 
CrviL Defense). Many cities practiced "blackouts." 
Cities on the Atlantic and Pacific coasts dimmed their 
lights. Ordinarily, the glare from their lights made ships 
near the shore easy targets for submarines. 

Internment of Aliens. Shortly after Japan attacked 
Pearl Harbor, the Federal Bureau of Investigation took 
over 1,700 enemy aliens into custody. Of the 4,000,000 
aliens in the United States, 1,100,000 citizens of Ger- 
many, Italy, and Japan were classified as enemy aliens. 



The steps taken against aliens affected the Japanese 
living on the Pacific Coast more strongly than any other 
group. In 1 941, the country had 40,869 Japanese aliens 
and 7 1 ,484 nisei, or American-born Japanese, living in 
California, Oregon, and Washington. Public opinion 
against all Japanese became strong after Pearl Harbor. 
Early in 1942, the government moved all Japanese 
from the Pacific Coast to relocation camps in Arkansas, 
Colorado, Utah, and other states. In February, 1942, 
Canada began to move about 23,000 Japanese out of 
areas west of the Cascade Mountains to camps in Al- 
berta, Manitoba, and Ontario. 

Science in Wartime 

Scientific inventions and discoveries helped shorten 
the war. The United States organized its scientific re- 
sources in the Office of Scientific Research and De- 
velopment under Vannevar Bush. This government 
agency invented or improved radar, flame tlirowers, 
rocket launchers, jet engines, amphibious assault boats, 
long-range navigational aids, devices for detecting sub- 
marines, radar bombsights, and radio proximity fuses 
that exploded shells near their targets. 

Scientists made it possible to produce large quantities 
of penicillin to cure a wide range of diseases. They de- 
veloped the insecticide DDT to fight jungle diseases 
caused by insects. Other medical advances included the 
use of blood plasma for the wounded. American, Brit- 
ish, and Canadian scientists cooperated to build the 
first atomic bomb (see Atomic Bomb). In Canada, the 
National Research Council coordinated the work of 
Canadian scientists. 

The Germans made the greatest progress in the field 
of rockets. They launched the first long-range rockets, 
the V-i and V-2 (see Guided Missile). The Germans 
also developed the first successful jet-propelled fighter 
planes (see Jet Propulsion). Other important Axis 
weapons included the antitank rifle, the heavy Tiger and 
Panther tanks, and smokeless and flashless gunpowder. 



The Aftermath of War 



World War II was the mightiest struggle that man- 
kind had ever seen. It caused major changes and de- 
velopments in every country. The Allies divided Austria 
and Germany into occupation zones after the war. Rus- 
sia annexed Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania early in the 
war. It received land from Finland, Germany, Japan, 
Poland, and Romania. Czechoslovakia got territory 
from Hungary, Bulgaria from Romania, Poland from 
Germany, and Romania from Hungary. Italy had to 
give up land to France, Greece, and Yugoslavia. Coun- 
tries occupied by Germany and Italy regained their in- 
dependence. In Asia, the Allies occupied Japan and 
Korea. Chinese Communists took control of Man- 
churia. The former Japanese islands — Carolines, Mar- 
shall, Marianas, and Palaus — became United States 
trust territories. Ten countries in Asia gained their in- 
dependence within five years after the war ended. 

The war solved some problems that had caused it, 
but created many more problems than it solved. Dic- 
tators no longer ruled Germany, Italy, and Japan. But 
Russia moved quickly to replace Germany as the most 
powerful country in Europe. Russia also sought to take 
Japan's place as the dominant power in Asia. It sought 



to set up a series of satellite nations under its rule. 
The Price of Peace 

War Costs. Historians find it difficult to measure the 
costs of World War II. They can only estimate. No 
assessor can count the individual cost of personal prop- 
erty lost in bombings and shellings. No person can 
measure the cost in human suffering and loss of life. 
Only a rough estimate of damage can be given. 

Casualties. World War II took the lives of more per- 
sons than any other war in history. It has been esti- 
mated that the number of war dead, civilian and mili- 
tary, totaled more than 22,000,000. The number of 
wounded has been estimated as more than 34,000,000. 
Figures on Chinese civilian deaths, which numbered in 
the millions, were never kept accurately. Civilians suf- 
fered the greatest losses, because of bombing, epidemics, 
massacres, starvation, and sheUing. Fewer died of dis- 
ease than in previous wars, but more died of starvation. 

Cost in Money. World War II was the most expensive 
war in history. It has been estimated that the cost of 
the war totaled $1,154,000,000,000, and the cost of 
property damage amounted to more than $239,000,- 



410 



000,000. The United States spent about $250,000,000 
each day of the war. It spent about 10 times what all 
previous U.S. wars had cost put together. The national 
debt of the United States rose from 142,968,000,000 in 
1940 to $269,422,000,000 in 1946. Many countries will 
continue to pay for the war in years to come through re- 
paying loans and caring for veterans. In 1962, the 
United States established a $500,000,000 fund to repay 
its citizens for losses suflfered in the war. Countries 
suffering the heaviest property damage included China, 
Germany, Hungary, Japan, Russia, and Yugoslavia. 
The damage in \Vorld War II covered a much wider 
area than that of World War I. Bombing and artillery 
fire devastated such major cities as Berlin, Budapest, 
Coventry, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Hiroshima, London, 
Manila, Milan, Munich, Nagoya, Nanking, Rotter- 
dam, .Stuttgart, Tokyo, and Warsaw. 

Filling the Vacuum. Germany had been the domi- 
nant power on the European continent. Japan had held 
this role in Asia. Their defeat in World War II imme- 
diately left open positions of leadership. Allied strategy 
allowed Russia a free hand in eastern Europe during 
the war. Some strategists had proposed that the Allies 
invade the Central Mediterranean and the Balkans, 
called "the soft underbelly of Europe." They believed 
that Russia's occupation of Hungary and Romania, and 
its influence in Yugoslavia, would threaten the future 
peace of the world. But the Allies chose instead to in- 
vade northern and southern France. Because of this 
strategy, a divided Europe arose, with eastern Europe 
under communist control and western Europe free. 

In Asia, the Russians moved quickly to take over 
Japan's position. The long struggle between the Chinese 
Communists and Nationalists ended in 1949. The com- 
munists claimed to rule all China. After Japanese 
armies moved out of Southeast Asia, and the southwest 
Pacific, revolutionists quickly took over. With China, 
France, and Great Britain devastated and financially 
exhausted by the war, the United States and Russia 
became the two major powers of the world. 

Population Changes 

The war left millions in Europe and Asia without ade- 
quate food, shelter, or clothing. They lacked fuel, ma- 
chinery, raw materials, and money. Their farms lay 



MILITARY CASUALTIES IN WORLD WAR II (1939-1945) 

Wounded 



Tola! 
Casualties 



China 

France 

Great 

Britain 
Russia 
United 

States 
Others 



Dead 

THE ALLIES 

3,211,419 1,319,958 
741,568 201,568 



Prisoners 
or Missing 



1,761,335 
400,000 



772,462 357,116 369,267 

20,127,000 6,115,000 14,012,000 

1,076,245 405,399 670,846 

3,802,000 400,000 2,400,000 



130,126 
140,000 

46,079 



2.000 



29,730,694 8,799,041 19,613,448 318,205 



THE AXIS 

Germany 11,800,000 3,250,000 

Italy 505,228 135,723 

Japan 2,025,000 1 ,800,0(10 

Others 1,340,000 884,000 



7,250,000 1,300,000 

225,000 144,505 

140,000 85,000 

26,000 430,000 



*ND figures available. 



15,670,228 6,069,723 7,641,000 1,959,505 



WORLD WAR II 

devastated. Infant mortality and disease were high. The 
United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administra- 
tion (UNRRA) and many private social agencies pro- 
vided aid for the starving and homeless (see United Na- 
tions Relief and Rehabilitation Administration). 

The war caused vast population shifts. Millions fled 
their homes because of their race, religion, or political 
beliefs, or were sent to isolated areas as slave laborers. 
At the end of the war, many became DP's, or displaced 
persons (see Displaced Person). Returning soldiers 
and prisoners of war added to the problems of adjust- 
ment. About 10,000,000 refugees had to move from 
their homes. Some returned to their homelands. Others 
inigrated to other countries. 

In some countries, whole groups were uprooted. The 
Poles moved westward from Russian-occupied eastern 
Poland. Millions of Chinese fled westward from the 
Japanese, and had to return. Many Arabs were forced 
out of Palestine, and Germans had to leave the Baltic 
states. East Prussia, Silesia, and the Sudetenland. Nearly 
6,000,000 European Jews died in German concentra- 
tion camps. Refugees by the thousands moved to the 
United States, Canada, Latin America, and Israel (see 
Immigration and Emigration; Migration). 

The United Nations 

Organizing the Peace. The Allies were determined 
not to repeat the mistakes of World War I. The Allies 
failed to set up an organization to enforce the peace 
until after World War I ended. In June, 1941, nine 
European governments-in-exile joined with Great Britain 
and the Commonwealth countries in signing the Inter- 
Allied Declaration. This document called for nations to 
cooperate and work for lasting peace. In August, 1941, 
President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill is- 
sued a statement of postwar objectives that became 
known as the Atlantic Charter (see Atlantic Charter). 

Shortly after the Pearl Harbor attack, 26 countries 
signed a Declaration by United Nations in Washington, 
D.C. They pledged to fight the Axis and make no 
separate peace agreements. In October, 1943, the 
foreign ministers of China, Great Britain, Russia, and 
the United States met at Moscow and suggested setting up 
an international organization in their Moscow Declaration. 

Birth of the United Nations. The Dumbarton Oaks 
conference, held in Washington, D.C, in 1944, de- 
veloped the idea of creating a postwar international 
organization (see Dumbarton Oaks). A conference of 
50 countries met in San Francisco on April 25, 1945, 
and prepared a charter for a L^nited Nations organiza- 
tion (see San Francisco Conference). 

The LInited Nations was born on Oct. 24. 1945. Its 

DIRECT WAR COSTS FOR MAJOR BELLIGERENTS 

THE ALLIES 

United States $330,000,000,000 

France 14(1,000,0110,000 

Russia 1 22,000,( l(JO,000 

Great Britain 64,000,000,000 

China 64,000,000,000 

THE AXIS 

Germany $282,000,000,000 

Japan 53,000,000,000 

Italy 27,000,000,000 



411 



WORLD WAR II 

first sessions were held the following January in London. 
Tlic United Nations also set up organizations to deal 
with agriculture, monetary problems, health, civil avia- 
tion, and other matters (see United N.\tions). 

The Peace Treaties 

The preparation of peace treaties with the defeated 
Axis countries took many months of conferences. The 
foreign ministers of China, France, Great Britain, Rus- 
sia, and the United States drew up the treaties, which 
were then submitted to the United Nations for approval. 
The wartime Allies first met in London in late 1945. 
The treaties with Italy, Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania, 
and Finland were signed in Paris in 1947. Disagree- 
ments between Russia and the West delayed the peace 
treaties for Austria, Germany, and Japan. Most of the 
Allies signed the treaty with Japan in 1951, and with 
Austria and Germany in 1955. Russia signed only the 
treaty with .\ustria. 

Axis Satellites. On Feb. 10, 1947, the Allies signed 
peace treaties with Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania, and 
Finland. The United States did not sign a treaty with 
Finland, because the two countries had not been at 
war. Allied occupation troops were required to leave 
Bulgaria within 90 days. The peace treaties contained 
guarantees against racial and religious discrimination, 
and banned the formation of fascist parties. Each nation 
had to repay two-thirds of the value of Allied property 
lost in the country as a result of the war. The Allies also 
limited the size of each nation's militaiy forces. 

Italy fought on the side of the Allies after 1943, but 
it had been a leading .^xis partner. The peace treaty 
with Italy was also signed in Paris on Feb. 10, 1947. It 
provided for the withdrawal of Allied occupation forces 
within 90 days. The treaty resembled those with the 
Axis satellites. It limited the size of Italy's armed forces, 
and required Italy to pay $360,000,000 in reparations 
within seven years. The treaty required Italy to give up 
African colonies, to give some border areas to France 
and Yugoslavia, and to give the Dodecanese Islands to 
Greece. Italy had to recognize the independence of 
Albania and Ethiopia, and Trieste as a free city. 

Japan came under Allied occupation within two 
weeks after it surrendered. General Mac.\rthur, as su- 
preme commander for the Allied Powers, ruled Japan 
during the occupation. Russia and the United States 
set up occupation zones in Korea, and Russian and 
Chinese troops rushed into Manchuria (see Korea 
[History]; Manchuri.\ [History]). 

Representatives of 52 countries met in San Francisco 
in September, 1951, to draw up a peace treaty with 
Japan. On September 8, diplomats from 49 of these 
countries signed the treaty. Czechoslovakia, Poland, 
and Russia opposed the terms of the pact and refused 
to sign. The treaty required Japan to give up its former 
possessions outside its four home islands. The Allies 
claimed reparations of more than $100,000,000. The 
treaty gave Japan the right to rearm for self-defense, to 
develop industries, and to negotiate defense and trade 
agreements. The United States officially ended its war 
with Japan on Apr. 28, 1952. With the end of the 
occupation, Japan signed treaties with the major Allies, 
allowing their troops to remain in Japan. In December, 



1956, Japan and Russia signed a separate peace treaty 
(see Japan JHistory]). 

Germany and Austria. The Allies divided Germany 
into four occupation zones. Russia controlled the east- 
ern zone. Great Britain the northwestern zone, France 
the Rhineland and the Saar Valley, and the United 
States the southwestern zone. Germany gave up the 
northern half of East Prussia to Russia, and Danzig, 
Silesia, and land east of the Oder River to Poland. 
Belgium, Czechoslovakia, and France also received 
territory. Berlin came under four-power rule. 

The Allies also divided and occupied Austria, after 
its liberation from Germany. Austria received its inde- 
pendence on May 15, 1955, after signing the Austrian 
State Treaty with France, Great Britain, Russia, and 
the United States (see Austria [History]). 

As soon as the Allies took over in 1945, they removed 
Nazis from public offices, and began educating the 
German people for democracy. Russia was given the 
right to remove for reparations all machinery in its zone 
that was not necessary for the German peacetime econ- 
omy. The other Allies also provided some equipment 
from their zones. Leading Nazis were tried for war 
crimes at Nuremberg, and each occupying country held 
war-crime trials in its zone (see Nuremberg Trials). 

The United States formally ended hostilities with 
Germany on Oct. 19, 1951. West Germany became an 
independent republic on May 5, 1955, but East Ger- 
inany continued as a Russian satellite (see Germany 
[History]). West Germany received the right to raise a 
500,000-man army for defense. It granted the Allies the 
right to station troops in Germany. Vincent j. Esposito 

Critically reviewed by Omar N. Bradley, 
Chester W. Nimitz, and Carl Spaatz 

Related Articles. Sec the History section of articles 
on countries that took part in World War II. Other 
related articles in World Book include; 

Battles 

Bataan Peninsula Manila Bay 

Chinese-Japanese Midway Island 

Wars Okinawa 

Corrcgidor Pearl Harbor 
Dunkerque Naval Base 

Guam Russo-Finnish Wars 
Iwo Jima 

Biooraphies 
allied military leaders 



Saipan 

.Solomon Islands 
.Stalingrad, 
Battle of 
Tobruk 
Wake Island 



Alanbrooke, Lord 
Alexander, Harold R.L.G. 
Arnold, Henry H. 
Bradley, Omar N. 
Buckner (family) 
Burke, .-Xrleigh A. 
Carney, Robert B. 
Chennault, Claire L. 
Clark, Mark W. 
Clay, Lucius D. 
Crerar, Henry D. G. 
Cunningham, .Andrew B. 
Doolittle, James H. 
Eaker, Ira C. 
Eisenhower, Dwight D. 
Gruenther, .Alfred M. 
Halscy, William F., Jr. 
Hobby, Oveta C. 
Kenney, George C. 
King, Ernest J. 
Kinkaid, Thomas C. 



Konev, Ivan S. 
Leahy, William D. 
Leigh-Mallory,SirTrafrordL. 
LeMay, Curtis E. 
Lemnitzer, Lyman L. 
Mac.Arthur, Douglas 
Marshall, George C. 
McNair, Lesley J. 
McNaughton, Andrew G. L. 
Mitscher, Marc A. 
Montgomery, Bernard L. 
Mountbatten, Louis 
Nimitz, Chester W. 
Patton, George S., Jr. 
Radford, Arthur W. 
Ramsay, .Sir Bertram H. 
Ridgway, Matthew B. 
Sherman, Forrest P. 
Smith, Holland M. 
Smith, Walter B. 
Somervell, Brehon B. 



412 



Vandegrift, Alexander A. 
Vandonberg, Hoyt S. 
Voroshilov, Klimcnt E. 
Wainwright, Jonathan M. 
Walker, Walton H. 
Wavell, Archibald P. 
Weygand, Maxime 
Zhukov, Georgi K. 



Spaatz, Carl 
Spruance, Raymond A. 
Stilwell, Joseph W. 
Taylor, Maxwell D. 
Tedder, Arthur W. 
Timoshenko, Semyon K. 
Turner, Richmond K. 
Twining, Nathan F. 
Van Fleet, James A. 

AXIS MILITARY LEADERS 

Doenitz, Karl Kesselring, Albert 

Goering, Hermann W. Rommel, Erwin 

Graziani, Rodolfo Rundstedt, Karl 
Heydrich, Reinhard Rudolf Gerd von 

Jodl, Alfred Yamamoto, Isoroku 

Keitel, Wilhelm Yamashita, Tomobumi 

ALLIED POLITICAL FIGURES 



Attlce, Clement R. 
Benes, Eduard 
Chamberlain (Neville) 
Chiang Kai-shek 
Churchill, , Sir Winston L.S. 
Daladier, Edouard 
DeGaulle, Charles A.J.M. 
Dollfuss, Engelbert 
Eden, Sir Anthony 
Giraud, Henri H. 
Hull, Cordell 



Knox, Frank 
Leopold (HI) 
Mihailovich, Draza 
Molotov, Vyacheslav M. 
Roosevelt, Franklin D. 
Schuschnigg, Kurt von 
Stalin, Joseph 
Stimson, Henry L. 
Tito 
Truman, Harry S. 



AXIS POLITICAL FIGURES 



Badoglio, Pietro 
Boris'ni 
Ciano, Count 
Goebbels, Paul Joseph 
Hess, Rudolph 
Himmler, Hcinrich 
Hirohito 
Hitler, Adolf 
Konoye, Prince 



Kurusu, Saburo 
Laval, Pierre 
Matsuoka, ^'osuke 
Mussolini, Benito 
Petain, Henri P. 
Quisling, Vidkun A. L. 
Ribbentrop, Joachim von 
Rosenberg, Alfred 
Tojo, Hideki 



UNCLASSIFIED 
Kaiser, Henry J. Mauldin, "Bill," William H. 

Krupp (family) Pyle, '"Ernie," E. T. 

Conferences and Treaties 



Casablanca Conference 
Munich Agreement 
Pan American Conferences 
Potsdam Conference 



San Francisco Conference 
Tehran Conference 
Yalta Conference 



Forces, Materials, and Weapons 



Air Force 
Aircraft Carrier 
Airplane 
Ammunition 
Amphibious 

Warfare 
Army 

Atomic Bomb 
Aviation 
Bazooka 
Blitzkrieg 
Bomb 
Bulldozer 
Camouflage 
Chemical Warfare 
Coast Guard, 

United States 
Commando 
Convoy 



American Legion 
Ainerican Legion 

Auxiliary 
Amvets 



Escort Carrier 
Fifth Cokimn 
Guided Missile 
Helmet 
Hostage 
Intelligence 

Service 
Jeep 

Jet Propulsion 
Kamikaze 
Landing Craft 
Lend-Lcase 
Marine 

Mine, Military 
Mine Layer 
Mine Sweeper 
Navy 
Paravane 
Propaganda 

Organizations 



PT Boat 
Radar 

Radio Control 
Rationing 
Rocket 
Savings Bond 
Snipe rscope 
Sonar 
Submarine 
Tank, Military 
Tank Destroyer 
To rpedo 
Torpedo Boat 
Walkie-Talkie 
War Aces 
War 

Correspondent 
Warship 



Gold Star Mothers, 

American 
Red Cross 
Strategic Services, Office of 



United Nations 

United Nations Relief 
and Rehabilitation 
Administration 



WORLD WAR II 

United Service 

Organizations 
Veterans of Foreign Wars 

of the United States 



Alaska Highway 
Atabrine 
Atlantic Charter 
Azores 
Burma Road 
Conscientious 

Objector 
D-Day 

Displaced Person 
Draft, Military 
Four Freedoms 



I. 



Unclassified 
Gestapo 
Graf Spec 
Korean War 
Lidice 
Maquis 
Neutrality 
Nurembcig Trials 
Partisan 
Polish Corridor 
Refugee 
Stars and Stripes 

Outline 



Stilwell Road 
V-E Day 
V-J Day 
LJnderg round 
Unknown Soldier 
War Crime 
War Debt 
War Risk 

Insui'ance 
World War I 
Yank 



Causes of Conflict 

A. Problems Left by World War I C. Aggression on 

B. The Rise of Dictatorships tfie Marcfi 
II. Men and Strategy 

A. Wartime Leaders C. Mobilization 

B. Strategy of the War 

III. Early Stages of the War 

A. Blitzkrieg B. Fighting in Eastern Europe 

IV. America Joins the War 

A. Defending the Americas D. War Comes to the 

B. Manpower United States 

C. The Battle of the Atlantic 

V. The Allies Attack in Africa and Europe 

A. On the Russian Front 

B. The North African Campaign 

C. The War in the Mediterranean 

D. The Air War in Europe 

E. The In\'asion of Europe 
The War in Asia and the Pacific 

A. Early Japanese Victories E 

B. The Allies Strike Back 

C. The South Pacific F 

D. Island Hopping 



VI. 



VII. 



VIII. 



Return to the 
Philippines 
The China-Burma- 
India Tlieater 
Target Tokyo 
The Secret War 

A. Spies and Saboteurs C. Psychological Warfare 

B. Underground Resistance 

The Home Front in the United States and Canada 



A. Producing for War 

B. Government Controls 

C. Financing the War 
IX. The Aftermath of War 

A. The Price of Peace 

B. Population Changes 



D. Security Measures 

E. Science in Wartime 



C. The United Nations 

D. The Peace Treaties 



Questions 

How did the Geneva Conference in 1932 fail to cor- 
rect conditions that helped cause World War II? 

Why was the Spanish Civil War considered "the testing 
ground of World War 11"? 

Why did newspapers call the seven months following 
the defeat of Poland "the phony war"? 

What was the blil^krieg? Kamikaze? Why were they used? 

Why did the French sink about 50 of their own ships at 
Toulon in 1942? 

What was the first Axis capital to fall into Allied 
hands? When did it fall? 

What was the "Vengeance Weapon" used by the Ger- 
mans shortly after the Allied invasion of France? 

What battle in World War II was the biggest naval en- 
gagement in history? Where was it fought and what were 
the results? 

What was the strategy behind the island-hopping cam- 
paign of Allied forces in the Pacific? 

What was the last major land battle of World War II? 



WORLD'S COLUMBIAN EXPOSITION 

WORLD'S COLUMBIAN EXPOSITION observed the 
400th anniveisaiy of the discovery of America by Chris- 
topher Cokimbus. It was held in Chicago in 1893, a 
year later than originally planned. It exhibited such 
wonders of its time as the expansion engine, Pullman 
cars, and the linotype. It used more electricity than 
the whole city of Chicago at that time. The first Ferris 
wheel was created for the exposition. 

Canals and lagoons laced the grounds, which covered 
666 acres. The main buildings were finished in plaster 
and fiber, and shone like white marble in the sunlight. 
They were often called The White City. The Transporta- 
tion Building represented early experiments in func- 
tional design in architecture. The Building of Manufac- 
turers and Liberal Arts, spanning nearly 40 acres, was 
the largest exposition building constructed up to that 
time. The Palace of Fine Arts now houses Chicago's 
Museum of Science and Industry. Herbert j. dotten 

See also Ferris Wheel (picture). 

WORLD'S FAIR. See Fairs and Expositions. 

WORM includes a wide variety of crawling animals 
with soft bodies. To zoologists, true worms differ from 
wormlike larvae. Larvae include the young of beetles, 
butterflies, and other insects. 

True worms are animals with many cells. But they 
have neither a backbone nor the supporting rod called 
the notochord. Some worms have a body cavity that holds 
their internal organs. Others, such as flukes and tape- 
worms, have their internal organs imbedded in a sort 
of loose packing tissue. They do not develop a creeping 
foot like snails, or jointed legs like insects. 

Worms range in size from microscopic forms to some 
of the tapeworms, which may grow 30 feet long. The 
nematodes, or eelworms, are among the most numerous 
kinds of worms. These creatures live by the millions in 
water, soil, and decaying material from plants and 
animals. Many woims live as parasites of man and 
animals. The important parasitic forms include flukes, 
tapeworms, pinworms, hookworms, trichina, ascaris, 
and filariae. They can cause serious human diseases, 
and can be difficult to eliminate from the body. 

Zoologists have had trouble defining worms and 
classifying them. Linnaeus divided all invertebrate ani- 
mals into two classes, Imeeta (insects) and Vermes 
(worms). Vermes took in wormlike creatures and many 



Roundworms that live in hu- 
man beings and animals some- 
times cause serious diseases. 



Free-Living Flatworms, or 

p/onorjans, live in ponds, 
streams, and oceans. 




other lower forms. In later classifications, the group 
Vermes took in fewer and fewer forms. The study of 
worms is called helminthology. 

Most wonns belong to one of four large groups, or 
phyla. The flatworms make up the phylum Platyhel- 
minthcs; roundworms belong to Aschelminthes; ribbon 
worms make up Nemertinea; and the segmented worms 
make up Annelida; The annelida are the most highly 
developed worms. They include leeches and earth- 
worms. J A McLeod 

Related Articles in World Book include: 

Earthworm Hookworm Ribbon Worm 

Eelworm Leech Roundworm 

Filaria Lobworm Tapeworm 

Flatworm Nematoda Trichina 

Fluke Pinworm Vinegar Eel 

Hair Snake Planarian 

WORM GEAR, or Worm Wheel. See Gear; Screw. 

WORMS, vawrms (pop. 62,400; alt. 295 ft.), a city 
in West Germany, is on the Rhine River between Mann- 
heim and Mainz. For location, see GERMANv(colormap). 

The city of Worms is over 2,000 years old. Its famous 
Romanesque cathedral, which dates from the 1300's, 
escaped destruction during World War II. Worms has 
gained historical importance as the meeting place of 
many German diets (imperial councils). Martin Luther 
appeared before Charles V at the Diet of Worms in 1521 
to defend his stand on Protestantism (see Luther, 
Martin). Worms is also the scene of the legendary 
story told in the epic poem Nibelungenlied (see 

NibELUNGENLIEd). Frank O. Ahnert 

WORMS, EDICT OF, was the sentence pronounced 
upon Martin Luther by the Diet of Worms in 1521. 
The Edict proclaimed Luther a heretic and cast him 
outside the protection of the law. 

See also Luther, Martin (The Diet of Worms). 

WORMSEED. See Lamb's-Quarters. 

WORMWOOD is a large group of plants that give off 
pleasant odors and belong to the thistle family. Often 
the term applies to an entire group of about 250 differ- 
ent kinds of plants of the genus Artemisia. The worm- 
wood shrub grows mostly in the northern hemisphere 
and is most abundant in arid regions. The most impor- 
tant wormwood in commercial use is a perennial plant 
that grows in Europe and North Africa. This kind of 
wormwood supplies an essential oil used in the manu- 
facture of absinthe and medicine. Europeans grow com- 



The Parchment Worm lives in a tube in 
the mud. It hos a delicate body and al- 
ways stays in its protective burrow. 

American Museum of Natural History 



Earthworms make the soil 
in which they live more fertile 
and better for growing crops. 



Sandworms live in burrows 
in sand or mud along the sea- 
shore, except at mating time. 






.^^' 



^^*^^mm^. 



"*^ 



^AA^pf-' 





J. Horace McFarland 

The Leaves of the Wormwood Yield a Valuable Oil. 

mon wormwood, or miigwort, for seasoning and medicinal 
purposes. People in eastern Canada and the north- 
eastern United States consider this plant a weed. Several 
kinds of shmbby wormwoods are called sagebrush in the 
western United States. 

The Bible mentions wormwood in several places. The 
plants called "hemlock" in the books of Amos and 
Hosea probably refer to the wormwood plant. 

Scientific Classification. Wormwood belongs to the 
composite family, Composilae. Wormwood yielding oil for 
absinthe is genus Artemisia, species .-l. absinthium. Common 
wormwood is .-1. vulgaris. The common sagebrush is A, 
trideiitata. The wormwood in the Bible is ^-1. judaica and 
possibly A. arborescens. Harold norman Moldenke 

WORSHIP. See Religion (Worship); Colonial Life 
IN America (Why the Colonists Came); Freedom of 
Religion; God; Idol; Prayer. 

WORSTED, W'OOSted, is a smooth, shiny, strong wool 
yarn. Its name came from Worstead, a town in England 
where the yarn was first made. The yarn is spun from 
long wool that has been combed to lay the fibers paral- 
lel. The word worsted also describes cloth woven with 
worsted yarns. Worsted cloths look smooth and hard. 
Poplin and serge fabrics are often worsted (see Poplin; 
Serge). 

WORT. See Brewing. 

WORTH, WILLIAM JENKINS. See Fort Worth. 

WOTAN. See Odin. 

WOUK, wohk, HERMAN (1915- ), an American 
novelist, won a Pulitzer prize in 1952 for The Caine 
Mutiny. The book became one of the most discussed 
works about World War II. Part of the novel was made 
into a play, The Caine Mutiny Court Martial, in 1954. 
The book appealed to many readers because it depicted 




Herman Wouk 



WOUND 

the resistance of a junior 
officer to the insane tyranny 
of his commanding officer 
on a ship in the Pacific. It 
appealed to eveiy man's 
desire for justice, but was 
in no way intended to rep- 
resent typical navy life. 
Wouk also wrote Aurora 
Dawn (1947); The City Boy 
(1948); Marjorie Morning- 
star (1955), the story of a 
young Jewish girl growing 
up in New York City; and 
Toungblood Hawke (1962), 
the tragic love story of a young genius from the Kentucky 
hills. Wouk was born in New York City. George j. Becker 

WOUND is damaged tissue. A wound usually results 
from some kind of external violence. When the skin 
is broken, doctors call the injury an open wound. If 
the skin remains intact, the injury is a closed wound. 

Open Wounds include (1) abrasions, (2) incisions, 
(3) lacerations, and (4) punctures. Abrasions result when 
the surface skin is scraped off. A person who falls on 
a cement sidewalk may "skin" his knee or elbow. This 
is an abrasion. When a person cuts his finger with a 
sharp knife, the cut is an incision. Wounds caused by 
instruments that tear the tissue are called lacerations. 
A fishhook could cause a laceration. Puncture wounds 
are caused by objects that penetrate the tissue. Stepping 
on a nail or pricking your finger with a pin causes a 
puncture wound. 

Closed Wounds include sprains, strains, and dis- 
locations of joints. Fractures that occur without break- 
ing the skin are also closed wounds. Probably the most 
common type of closed wound is a contusion. Contusions 
include "black and blue spots" and black eyes. See 
Dislocation; Fracture; Sprain. 

Infection and Bleeding. Any wound may become in- 
fected or bleed. Open wounds are particularly subject 
to infection because the skin, the body's first line of 
defense, is broken, and germs may enter. Sometimes 
germs may be carried into the wound by the object that 
caused the injury. Closed wounds may become infected 
if the injury ruptures deep-lying organs, such as the 
bowel. In open wounds, bleeding appears on the sur- 
face. In closed wounds, blood seeps into the tissues. If 
the injury occurs near the surface, the bleeding usually 
discolors the skin, as in a black eye. Bleeding from any 
wound may stop by itself when the blood clots (see 
Blood [Blood Clotting]). If large vessels are injured, 
bleeding may be serious and threaten life. 

First Aid. Open wounds should be covered immedi- 
ately with a sterile dressing or a clean cloth. This helps 
protect the wound from germs. Apply firm pressure 
over the dressing to stop bleeding. Do not pour anti- 
septic solutions into wounds. Such solutions often 
damage delicate tissues and interfere with healing. 

A serious wound always requires a doctor's attention. 
He washes the wound carefully, removes dirt and foreign 
objects, and may cut away destroyed tissue. Sometimes 
he brings together the edges of a gaping wound with 
tape. If the wound is very large, the doctor may suture 



415 



WOUNDED KNEE, BATTLE OF 

(sew) it. Doctors often give drugs to combat infection. 
In open wounds, particularly puncture wounds, the 
physician usually gives the patient tetanus antitoxin 
to prevent tetanus (see Tetanus). 

Healing of Wounds is a natural process. Proper heal- 
ing depends on healthy tissues and takes place steadily. 
Infection or damaged tissues interfere with healing. 
Wounds that heal without such interference heal by 
primL.ry intention. When infection occurs or tissues die, 
granulation tissue gradually fills the cavity (see Granu- 
lation). This process is called healing by second in- 
tention. Michael L. Mason 

See also Cut; First Aid. 

WOUNDED KNEE, BATTLE OF. See South Dakota 
(Territorial Dass). 

WOVOKA, wo VO kuh (1856?-1932). founded the 
Ghost Dance religion of the western American Indians. 
While sick with a fever in 1889. he dreaincd that he was 
lifted into the sky where the Gieat Spirit talked to him. 
He also saw all the old-time Indians living a happy life. 
The Great Spirit taught him some songs and a new- 
dance, and told him to teach the Indians to stop fight- 
ing and to lead a good life. Then no one would ever 
grow old, be sick, or go hungry. All the dead Indians 
and the buffalo would come back to life. 

Wovoka was a Paiutc Indian, born in Nevada. His 
father had been a prophet before him. Adopted as a boy 
by a white settler named David Wilson, he was also 
known as Jack Wilson. e. Adamson hoebel 

WPA was the Works Progress Administration. See 
New Deal (Relief); Roosevelt, Franklin D. (The 
New Deal); .\dult Education. 

WRANGEL, RA.\G gul, FERDINAND VON (1794- 
1870), Baron von Wrangel, was a Russian naval offi- 
cer and colonial administrator. He led an e.xpedition 
into the Siberian Arctic between 1820 and 1824 which 
greatly increased knowledge about the region. He be- 
came governor of Alaska in 1830. As the Russian Min- 
ister of Marine, he opposed the sale of Alaska and had 
to retire. Wrangel Island is named for him (see Wrangel 
Island). He was born of German parents in Livonia, 
a Russian province. William p. Brandon 

WRANGEL ISLAND, RA.NG gul, lies in the Arctic 
Ocean, about 90 miles north of the northeastern corner 
of Siberia. It covers an area of 1,806 square miles, and 
has a population of about 50. It is owned by Russia. 
The island is a dreary stretch of barren, granite rock 
locked in most of the year by solid ice packs. Lichen 
and a little grass grow there during the summer. There 
are birds, polar bears, seals, and walruses on the is- 
land. The people fish, hunt, and trap furs. There is 
also a meteorological station on Wrangel Island. For 
location, see Russia (color map). 

Wrangel Island was named for the Russian explorer 
Baron Ferdinand von Wrangel, who searched for it in 
1823 after Siberian natives had reported its existence. 
But Wrangel never found the island. American whalers 
discovered it in 1867, and named it for Wrangel. 
Claimed by the United States, Canada, and Russia, 
the island was finally left to Russia in 1924. Russia 
sent settlers there in 1926, Theodore Shabad 

WRECKING MACHINES. See Building and Wreck- 
ing Machines. 




The House Wren perches in front of its man-made home. Wren 
houses are usually made of white pine, oal&lt;, cypress, or poplar. 

WREN is a small, active bird found in most parts of 
North America. Wrens have slender bills,' rounded 
wings, and dull brown or gray feathers. They often hold 
their tails erect instead of straight out behind as do 
other birds. Wrens like to live near the ground. They 
seem to be always moving about and never at rest. 
Wrens can sing melodiously, but they can also make 
disagreeable chattering sounds. There are 63 species of 
wren, most of which live in Asia and the Americas, 
Only one species of wren lives in Europe, 

The house wren, also known as the common wren, the 
jenny wren, and the brown wren, is the most familiar of all 
the wrens. It measures about 5 inches long and often 
lives in cities. It will nest in wren houses built especially 
for it. It lays five to seven eggs, white in color and 
thickly dotted with salmon spots. The wren is valuable 
to farmers and gardeners because it eats insects, par- 
ticularly around gardens. 

The largest wren in the United States is the cactus 
wren. It may be 7 inches long. This wren lives in the dry 
regions of the Southwest, Its breast is heavily spotted. 
The rock wren lives in the western part of the L^nited 
States, It builds its nest under rocks in the diy foothills 
of the Rocky Mountains, It is mostly gray in color, and 
about an inch shorter than the cactus wren. The 
Carolina wren lives in the southern United .States, It 
often nests in farm buildings. The Carolina wren meas- 
ures about 5| inches long. Bewick's wren is about 5 
inches long. It likes to live around people's homes. It 
has a white-edged tail and a white line over its eyes. The 
winter wren, tiniest of all the wrens, measures only about 
4 inches long. It builds its nest in the wild forests of the 
northern United States and Canada, It has a melodious 
song. The long-hilled and the short'billcd marsh wrens 
build their nests among reeds and cattails in marshes. 
The long-billed marsh wren has a gurgling, liquid song. 



416 



The song of die short-billed marsh wren sounds like 
striking two pebbles rapidly together. The long-billed is 
the more common of the two marsh wrens. Its tail stands 
up straight, or forward over its back. The short-billed 
marsh wren is only a little more than 4 inches long. 

Scientific Classification. The wren belongs to the family 
Trogloilytidae. The Cactus wren is genus Heleodytes, species 
H. brunneicapillus; the rock wren is Salpimtes obsoletus; the 
Carolina wren is Thryothoriis hidovicianus; the winter wren 
is J^i'annus hiemaiis; and the house wren is Troglodytes 
a'edon. The long-billed marsh wren is Telmatodytes 
palustris; and the short-billed marsh wren is Cistothorus 
Stetlaris. Leonard W. Wing 

See also Bird (table. State Birds; Territories of Birds; 
color pictures. Birds' Eggs, Favorite Songbirds, Other 
Bird Favorites). 

WREN, SIR CHRISTOPHER (1632-1723), was one of 
the most famous English architects. He designed Saint 
Paul's Cathedral and more than 50 other London 
churches after the great London fire of 1666. He had 
a facile, inventive mind, and designed a variety of 
buildings characterized by simplicity and graceful 
structural relationships. 

He won his first architectural fame in 1663 with his 
plans for the Sheldonian Theater in Oxford, which he 
had roofed with an unusual and economic wood truss. 
As a royal surveyor, he had 
planned to rebuild Saint 
Paul's Cathedral before the 
fire of 1666 destroyed it. 
Wren was commissioned to 
rebuild Saint Paul's com- 
pletely after the fire, and 
he worked at the task imtil 
1710. His first plan for a 
central dome was rejected 
for a medieval Latin cross 
plan. He then developed a 
series of improved schemes. 
His final plan involved a 
great dome of daring struc- 
tural ingenuity, which 

spanned the aisles and nave of the cathedral 
London [picture. Saint Paul's Cathedral]). 

Wren prepared a new city plan for London after the 
fire. His plan would have made London the most beau- 
tiful and workable city in the world. But it threatened 
property arrangements and was not carried out. He also 
designed such public buildings as the king's palace at 
Greenwich, and Hampton Court. 

Wren was born in East Knoyle, Wiltshire. He was 
graduated from Oxford LTniversity, and later taught 
geometry and astronomy there. He became one of the 
first members of the Roval Societv. Riceiard m. Bennett 

WREN, PERCIVAL CHRISTOPHER (1885-1941), was 
a British novelist. Beau Geste (1924), as a novel, play, 
and motion picture, brought him international renown. 
He followed it with Beau Sabrew (1926), Beau Ideal 
(1928), r/ifGoo(/6V:rto( 1929), and Two Feet from Heaven 
(1940) but never quite repeated his first success. Wren 
was born in Devon, England. He was graduated from 
Oxford University, and then toured the world. His first 
novels dealt with India, where he served in a govern- 
ment post for 10 years. R. \v. Stuim\n 

WREN'S NEST. See Georgia (Interesting Places to 
Visit). 




Culver 

Sir Christopher Wren 



(see 



WRESTLING 

WRESTLING, REHS ling, is an e.xciting sport in 
which two opponents try to pin each other's shoulders 
to the ground. Wrestlers must be strong, agile, and in 
perfect condition. They use almost every muscle in 
their bodies. This makes wrestling one of the most 
healthful sports, but it also demands skill and intelli- 
gence. A small, clever wrestler may often pin a much 
heavier, stronger opponent. 

Kinds of Wrestling. There are two main kinds of 
wrestling: (1) Greco-Roman and (2) catch-as-catch-can. 
Both styles are Olympic Games sports. 

Greeo-Roman Wrestling emphasizes standing holds. 
The wrestlers strip to the waist and are not allowed to 
seize each other auN^vhcre below the belt. The rules do 
not permit tripping, tackling, or holds on the legs. A 
fall is scored when one contestant pins both of his 
opponent's shoulders to the ground at the same time. 
Bulk and endurance count in this style of wrestling. 
The Greco-Roman style originated in France. 

CaUh-as-Catch-Can Wrestling emphasizes prone holds. 
It allows the wrestlers great freedom. .■\11 holds, includ- 
ing tripping and tackling, arc permitted except kicking 
and choking holds. A fall is scored in the same manner 
as in Greco-Roman wrestling. Catch-as-catch-can wres- 
tling encourages strategy and permits every legitimate 
trick. It is the chief kind of wrestling in the L^nited 
States. 

Amateur Wrestling in the L'nited States is a care- 
fully regulated sport. Thousands of young boys in high 
school and college take part in amateur wrestling 
matches. The rules forbid dangerous or severely punish- 
ing holds. There are eight weight classes in intercolle- 
giate competition: flyweight, 121 pounds and under; 
bantamweight, 128 pounds; featherweight, 136 pounds; 
lightweight, 145 pounds; welterweight, 155 pounds; middle- 
weight, 165 pounds; light heavyweight, 175 pounds; and 
heavyweight, unlimited. 

Ainateur matches take place on mats laid on a floor, 
and are divided into three 3-minute periods. The first 
period starts with the wrestlers standing. The second 
and third periods start with the wrestlers in the referee^s 
position, a kneeling position with one wrestler under the 
other. This puts one man on oflFense and the other on 
defense. They reverse positions at the start of the third 
period. Point systems for scoring give credit for skillful 
execution of holds or technical maneuvers. A match 
ends when one wrestler scores a fall. To do this, he must 
pin his opponent's shoulders to the mat, usually for 2 
seconds. Otherwise, the wrestler ahead on points at the 
end of three periods wins the match. 

Professional Wrestling is classed as an exhibition in 
the L^nited States. Professional matches take place in 
padded rings similar to boxing rings. The wrestlers may 
kick, punch, bite, gouge, aild use other crowd-pleasing 
tactics not allowed in amateur wrestling. Even woinen 
take part in professional wrestling. Television has 
helped make professional wrestling popular. 

History. Wresding ranks as one of the oldest sports. 
Some authorities say it was known as early as 3000 B.C. 
in Egypt and Babylonia. Ancient Greek legends tell of 
the wrestling exploits of .'\jax, Ulysses, and other heroes. 
Wrestling became one of the most important events of 
the Olympics (see Olympic Games). Roman athletes 

417 



WRESTLING 



also fought in wrestling contests. Wrestling continued 
to remain a popular sport through the early Christian 
era and the Middle Ages. Nearly every country and re- 
gion developed its own style. American Indians held 
leg-wrestling contests. Japan developed the huge Sumo 
wrestlers who may weigh over 300 pounds. 

In the United States, wrestling developed as an ama- 
teur sport. Holiday celebrations often included wrestling 
matches between local champions. Abraham Lincoln 
won fame as a young man for his wrestling skill. Pro- 
fessional wresding started in the i88o's. The universi- 
ties of Pennsylvania and Yale held the first college 
meet in igoo. 

See also Iceland (Way of Life); Judo. 



A Fall is scored when a wrestler 
pins his opponent's shoulders to the 
mot for a certain length of time — 
2 seconds in amateur rules. The top 
wrestler, be/ow^ has pinned his man 
with a crotch and half-nelson hold. 




WRESTLING 




Wrestling is a challenging sport. It pits two men in a 
struggle to pin each other's shoulders to a mat. Amateur 
and professional wrestling differ in the tactics allowed. 
These pictures show some of the basic holds amateurs use. 




Tie-Up occurs when two wrestlers 
come to grips, or tie up, while in a 
standing position. Several different 
grips con be used. The tie-up is the 
starting position for a number of ways 
of forcing an opponent to the mat. 




Leg Dive, or tackle, is a common 
way of making a take-down — getting 
an opponent onto the mat. This is the 
first goal of any match. The offen- 
sive wrestler may tockle either one 
leg or both legs of his opponent. 



Wrestling Matches start with the 
opponents approaching each other 
from the opposite sides of a circle on 
the mat. They bend over, and spar 
and feint, in an effort to seize their 
opponent and toss him onto the mat. 





^^^^f 




Referee's Position starts the sec- 
ond and third periods of a match. 
It puts the top wrestler on offense 
and the bottom one on defense. This 
tests their ability to use an advan- 
tage or to escape from a bad position. 



418 





Cross-Ankle Pickup is another 
hold a wrestler uses to get an oppo- 
nent down on the mat. He grabs his op- 
ponent's ankle with one hand and puts 
the other arm around his waist. This 
provides leverage to bring him down. 




Professional Wrestlers thrill crowds with leaping kicks and 
other spectacular tactics that are banned in amateur wrestling. 



Switch means a wrestler obtains 
arm leverage to change from o de- 
fensive to on offensive position. The 
wrestler in black, below, has gripped 
his opponent's thigh. This gives him 
leverage to press bock and force his 
opponent into a defensive position. 




Ride describes the maneuvers by a 
wrestler to maintain a (&gt;o$ition of ad- 
vantage over his opponent. An offen- 
sive wrestler might ride, or try to 
control his opponent, by gripping an 
ankle to limit his maneuverability. 





Sit-Out is a basic defensive maneu- 
ver often performed by the under- 
neath man in the referee's position. 
He goes into a sitting position. This 
puts him in position to escape holds 
or to maneuver so he con apply holds. 




WRIGHT, FRANK LLOYD 

WRIGHT, FRANK LLOYD (1869- 1959), is generally re- 
garded as one of the world's greatest architects. A bril- 
liantly imaginative and productive creator, he designed 
more than 600 buildings during a professional career of 
66 years. 

Wright was born in Richland Center, Wis. He studied 
civil engineering for two years at the University of Wis- 
consin, but left without graduating. He moved to Chi- 
cago, where he obtained a job as draftsman and designer 
in the Chicago office of Louis Sullivan (see SuLLrvAN, 
Louis H.). Wright referred to Sullivan as '"Dear Mas- 
ter." Wright worked from 1887 until 1893 for Sullivan, 
and then started an independent architectural career. 
He designed many houses in Chicago and its suburbs 
that were revolutionary in plan and appearance. Many 
of the homes he designed had all the dwelling rooms on 
one floor, with the rooms freely interconnected. He used 
windows grouped together in long rows, and wide over- 
hanging eaves. He termed the long, low, and horizontal 
lines of these homes "The Prairie Style." His one-story 
houses of the 1930's established many features of con- 
temporary house design, including the ''carport," 
which he devised and named. 

Wright experimented with new types of construction, 
especially in poured concrete and precast concrete 
blocks. In 191 1 , he built his own home in Spring Green, 
Wis. He named it Taliesin, a Welsh word meaning 
shining brow. He established an architectural school, 

Frank Lloyd Wright, one of America's most famous architects, 
greatly influenced the development of modern architecture. 



ted Press Int. 





The S. C. Johnson &amp; Son Building in Racine, Wis., was 
one of three Wright masterpieces chosen in a 1958 poll that 
named "The Seven Wonders of Americon Architecture." 



Wright Designed the Famous Robie House in Chicago in 
1909. Built of brick, it has been nicl&lt;named "The Battleship." 




the "Taliesin Fellowship," in Spring Green in 1932. 
In 1938, he built Taliesin West, near Phoenix, Ariz. 

.'Vmong Wright's most famous nonresidential struc- 
tures are the Larkin Company Building, BufTalo, N.Y. 
(1904); the Unity Church, Oak Park, 111. (1906); the 
Imperial Hotel, Tokyo, Japan (1916-1922); two build- 
ings for S. C. Johnson &amp; Son, Inc., in Racine, Wis. 
(1938 and 1948); the campus of Florida Southern Col- 
lege at Lakeland (1940); and the Guggenheim Museum, 
New York City (1959). 

Wright wrote a number of books, including An Or- 
ganic Architecture (1939), An Autobiography (1943), When 
Democracy Builds (1946), and Genius and Mobocracy 
(1949). He wrote many magazine articles, and lectured 
throughout the world, stressing organic principles of 

design. Hugh Morrison 

Related Articles in World Book include: 

Oklahoma (Places 



to Visit [Price 

Towcrl) 
Skyscraper (picture) 
Tokyo (picture. The 

Imperial Hotel) 



y\rchitecturc (What Makes 

Great Architecture; 

Architecture Today) 
Buffalo (Interesting Places 

to Visit [The Martin House]) 
Jews (picture. Today's 

Synagogues) 

WRIGHT, HAROLD BELL (1872-1944), an American 
author, wrote the popular novels The Shepherd of the 
Hills (1907) and Jlie Winning of Barbara Worth (191 1). 
Wright was born in Rome, N.Y. He began writing 
while serving as a minister in the Church of the Dis- 
ciples. Frederick |. Hoffman 

WRIGHT, RICHARD (1908-1960), an American Negro 
fiction writer, dealt with the social problems facing the 
American Negro. His first book, Uncle Tom's Children 
(1938), was followed by A'ative Son (1939), the scene of 
which is laid in Chicago. These novels won Wright the 
■Spingarn medal in 1941. Native Son became a play. 
Black Boy (1945) is based on the early years of Wright's 
life. He also wrote While Man, Listen! (1957) and Lawd 
Today, published in 1963, after his death. Wright was 
born in Natchez, Miss., and left home at 15. He had 
little education. He moved to Chicago at the beginning 
of ihc depression of the 1930's. Carl Niemeyer 

WRIGHT, RUSSEL (1904- ), an American indus- 
trial designer, promoted one of the most successful pot- 
tery dinncrware sets of recent times. He strongly influ- 
enced industrial design. In 1955, he conducted a 
survey of the crafts industry in Southeast Asia for 
the International Cooperation Administration of the 
United States. The purpose was to stimulate the import 
and sale of Asian craftwork in the United States, and 
thus to raise living standards in southeastern Asia. 
Wright was born in Lebanon, Ohio. He worked in stage 
design, and in industrial design, specializing in furni- 
ture and household accessories. euoene f. Bunker, jr. 

WRIGHT, SEWALL (1889- ), developed a math- 
ematical theory of biological evolution, based on the 
Mendelian laws of heredity. His theory of genetic drift 
stated that in small populations, chance, rather than 
natural selection, is an important evolutionary agent 
(see Evolution). Wright was born in Melrose, Mass. 
After a distinguished career at the University of Chicago, 
he became professor of genetics at the L'niversity of Wis- 
consin in 1955. M. IRDECAI L. CiABRIEL 

WRIGHT, WILLARD HUNTINGTON. See Van Dine, 

S. S. 



420 



WRIGHT BROTHERS, Wilbur (1867-19 12) and Or- 
viLLE (187 1 -1 948), invented and built the first successful 
airplane. On Dec. 17, 1903, they made the world's first 
flight in a power-driven, heavier-than-air machine at 
Kitty Hawk, N.C. Orville Wright piloted the plane, 
having won the privilege by the toss of a coin. He flew 
120 feet and remained in the air for 12 seconds. The 
brothers made three more flights that day. The longest, 
bv Wilbur, was 852 feet in 59 seconds. Five persons be- 
sides the Wrights witnessed the flights. Only three or 
four newspapers reported the event the next morning, 
and their accounts were inaccurate. The Journal in the 
Wrights' home city of Dayton, Ohio, did not even men- 
tion it. Oddly enough, the first scientific description of 
the machine and its successful flights appeared the 
following March in a magazine entitled Cleanings in Bee 
Culture. The Wrights did not foresee how greatly the 
airplane would change civilization. They did not be- 
lieve at first that it would ever be possible to fly at night. 

Early Life. Wilbur Wright was born Apr. 16. 1867, on 
a small farm eight miles from New Castle, Ind., and 
Orville Wright was born Aug. 19, 1871. in Dayton, 
Ohio. Their father was a bishop of the United Brethren 
Church. The boys went through high school, Wilbur in 
Richmond, Ind., and Orville in Dayton, but neither 
received a diploma. Wilbur did not bother to go to the 
commencement exercises, and Orville took special sub- 
jects rather than a prescribed course in his final year. 
Mechanics fascinated them even in childhood. To earn 
pocket money they sold home-made mechanical toys. 
Orville started a printing business, building his own 
press. They later launched a weekly paper, the West 
Side News, with Wilbur as editor. Wilbur was 25 and 
Orville 21 when they began to rent and sell bicycles. 
Then they began to manufacture them, assembling the 
machines in a room above their shop. They built the 
"Van Cleve" bicycle. 

Flying Experiments. After reading about the death 
of pioneer glider Otto Lilienthal in i8g6, the brothers 
became interested in flying. They began serious reading 

The Wright Brothers' First Airplane flew at a speed of 
about 6.8 miles per hour on its first flight in December, 1903. 



WRIGHT BROTHERS 

on the subject in 1899, and soon obtained all the scien- 
tific knowledge of aeronautics then available. That 
same year they experimented for a day or two with a 
five-foot biplane kite. 

On the advice of the Weather Bureau in Washington, 
D.C., the Wrights selected for their experiments a nar- 
row strip of sand called Kill Devil Hill, near the little 
settlement of Kitty Hawk, N.C. In 1900, they e.xperi- 
mented at Kitty Hawk with their first man-carr)-ing 
glider. It measured 16 feet from wing tip to wing tip, 
and cost S15 to build. They returned to Kitty Hawk in 
I got with a larger glider. In these glider tests they 
showed that they could control sidewise balance by 
presenting the right and left wings at different angles to 
the wind. But neither the 1900 or the 1901 glider had 
the lifting power they had counted on. 

The \Vrights concluded that all published tables of 
air pressures on curved surfaces must be wrong. They 
set up a six-foot wind tunnel in their shop and began 
experiments with model wings. They tested more than 
200 wing models in the tunnel. From the results of their 
tests, they made the first reliable tables of air pressures 
on curved surfaces. These tables made it possible for 
them to design a machine that could fly. 

The brothers built a third glider and took it to Kitty 
Hawk in the summer of 1902. This glider, based on 
their new figures, had aerodynamic qualities far in ad- 



Orville Wright 



Wilbur Wright 

L'miiTwi.iijil &amp; I_'ndei-wood 






^ 



Mi^-j 



WRIGHT BROTHERS 

vance of any tried before. With it, they solved most of 
the problems of balance in flight. They made nearly 
1,000 glides in this model, and, on some, covered dis- 
tances of more than 600 feet. Their basic patent, applied 
for in 1903, relates to the 1902 glider. 

First Airplane. Before leaving Kitty Hawk in 1902 
the brothers started planning a power airplane. By the 
fall of 1903, they completed building the machine at a 
cost of less than $1,000. It had wings 40i feet long and 
weighed about 750 pounds with the pilot. They de- 
signed and built their own lightweight gasoline engine 
to install in the airplane. The Wrights went to Kitty 
Hawk in September, 1903, but a succession of bad 
storms and minor defects delayed their experiment until 
December 1 7. They were so sure of the accuracy of their 
calculations that they showed no trace of surprise when 
die machine actually flew. 

The Wrights continued their flying experiments at 
a field near Dayton in 1904 and 1905. In 1904, they 
made 105 flights, but totaled only 45 minutes in the 
air, although two flights lasted five minutes each. On 
Oct. 5, 1905, the machine flew 24,2 miles in 38 minutes, 
3 seconds. When the Wrights first oflfered their machine 
to the United States government, they were not taken 
seriously. But by 1908 they closed a contract with the 
United States Department of War for the first military 
airplane. Meanwhile, they resumed their experiments 
at Kitty Hawk and made flights which newspapers re- 
ported at great length. 

Immediately after these trials, Wilbur went to France, 
where he aroused the admiration and enthusiasm of thou- 
sands. He made flights to altitudes of 300 feet and more. 
He also arranged with a French company for the con- 
struction of his machine in France. When he returned 
to the United States, he made demonstration flights 
from Governors Island, N.Y., around the Statue of 
Liberty, up to Grant's Tomb, and back. 

While Wilbur was in France, Orville made successful 
flights in the United States. On the morning of Sept. 9, 
1908, he made 57 complete circles at an altitude of 120 
feet over the drill field at Fort Myer, Va, He remained 
in the air one hour and two minutes, and established 
several records on the same day. On Sept. 1 7, however, 
while he was flying at 75 feet, a blade of the right-hand 
propeller struck and loosened a wire of the rear rudder. 
The wire coiled about the blade and snapped it across 
the middle. The machine became difficult to manage 
and plunged to the earth. Orville suffe ed a broken 
thigh and two broken ribs. His passenger, Thomas E. 
Selfridge, died within three hours of a fractured skull. 
This accident was the most serious in the Wright 
brothers' career. Orville reappeared at Fort Myer the 
following year, fully recovered. He completed official 
tests with no evidence of nervousness. 

In August, 1909. the Wrights closed a contract with 
some wealthy men in Germany for the formation of a 
German-Wright Gompain-. Later in the year, they form- 
ed the Wright Gompany in New York City to manu- 
facture airplanes. While the brothers earned some 
money for their efforts, they were seriously troubled with 
imitators, infringements on their patents, conflicting 
claims, and long-drawn-out lawsuits. 

After Wilbur's Death. Three years later, just as the 



airplane was beginning to make great advances, Wil- 
bur Wright died of typhoid fever. Orville worked on 
alone, and in 1913 won the Collier Trophy for a device 
to balance airplanes automatically. He sold all his in- 
terest in the Wright Company and retired in 1915. 

Wright continued work on the development of avia- 
tion in his own shop, the Wright Aeronautical Labora- 
tory. In 1929, he received the first Daniel Guggenheim 
Medal for his and Wilbur's contributions to the ad- 
vancement of aeronautics. In 1955, Wilbur was elected 
to the Hall of Fame. 

Orville sent the original plane flown at Kitty Hawk 
to the .Science Museum in South Kensington, London, 
in 1928, after a dispute with the Smithsonian Institu- 
tion. The museum sent the plane to the LInited States 
in 1948. and it is now in the National Air Museuin in 
Washington, D.C. Basic principles of that machine are 
used in every airplane that flies. The Kill Devil Na- 
tional Monument in North Carolina became the Wright 
Brothers National Monument in 1953. Welman a.Shrader 

.See also .Airplane (Development of the Airplane); 
Glider (Pioneer Gliders). 

WRIGHT-PATTERSON AIR FORCE BASE covers an 
8.400-acre area about 4 miles northeast of Dayton, O. 
It is headquarters for the Air Force Logistics Command 
which procures and maintains equipment for the U.S. 
Air Force. It houses the Air Force Institute of Tech- 
nology and the Aeronautical Systems Division. The 
merger of Wright and Patterson fields in 1946 estab- 
lished the base. Both fields were built in 1917. Wright 
was called McCook Field until 1927, then renamed for 
the Wright brothers. The U.S. Army named Patterson 
Field for Lt. Stuart Patterson of Dayton. John h. Thompson 

See also Ohio (Interesting Places to Visit). 

WRIT is generally used in its legal meaning to describe 
the written orders of a court of law. Many kinds of 
orders have specific names. For instance, if a court 
orders the sheriff to seize property which has been 
wrongfullv taken, it furnishes him with a writ of replevin. 
A writ of habeas corpus is designed to protect persons 
taken into custody unlawfully. A writ of error is an order 
to a court to send records of a proceeding to a superior 
or appellate court, so that the Judgment may be exam- 
ined for errors of law. Early English-speaking people 
called anything in writing a writ. Even today, some 
persons call the Bible the Holy Writ, erwin n. griswold 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Attachment Injunction Replevin 

Certiorari, Writ of Mandamus Subpoena 

Habeas Corpus Quo Warranto Summons 

WRIT OF ASSISTANCE. In colonial days the British 
government provided customs officials in America with 
general search warrants called writs of assistance. The 
officials used them to enforce the collection of import 
duties and to seize goods upon which no duty had been 
paid. The writs were different from ordinary search war- 
rants, which authorized the officers to seize only speci- 
fied goods at a certain time and place. With writs of 
assistance they could search for suspected goods at any 
time in any place. In 1767, parliament declared the 
writs legal. But the colonists opposed them, and they 
were seldom used. In modern law, a writ of assistance is 
a court order to a sheriff, commanding him to turn over 
certain real estate to the person entitled to it. Sec also 
Search Warrant. John r. alden 



422 



WRITING, as a career, attracts more aspirants tlian 
any other field in the arts. The writer's job seems both 
simple and glamorous. He needs only a few simple 
tools — paper and a typewriter, pencil, or pen — com- 
pared with the tools otlier professional workers need. He 
can set his own working hours, live where he wishes, 
and live his private life witliout interruption. The 
writer has no boss but hmiself, and no retirement age 
to limit his productive life. 

Because writing seems so easy, everyone thinks he can 
do it. Anyone who can speak is apt to assume that he 
can also write, regardless of whedier he is equipped 
with literary skills. In no other area does the profes- 
sional worker face such widespread competition from 
amateurs and semiprofessionals. A leading New York 
literary agent estimates that more than a million 
WTiters and would-be writers are working in the United 
States at any given time. An editor puts tlie total at 
1 ,500,000, and guesses that at least one of every three 
of them is at work on a novel. 

Most of diese million or more aspiring writers want 
to write for the sake of writing. They also think that 
writing offers rich rewards in almost innumerable mar- 
kets. They find encouragement in magazines for 
writers and in mail-order courses in writing. One of the 
leading literary-market magazines lists more than 
3,000 paying markets for stories, books, articles, plays, 
short sketches, poems, television and radio scripts, 
reviews, and other items. In the United States alone, 
potential users of a writer's work include several hun- 
dred book publishers, scores of motion-picture studios, 
and thousands of magazines, newspapers, and radio and 
television stations. 

Despite the muldtude of markets, the rewards for 
literary effort are comparatively small, except for a 
small number of professional authors. Writers receive 
fi-om $30,000,000 to $40,000,000 a year for manu- 
scripts, but most of the money comes from a relatively 
small number of major markets. Of the million or more 
persons striving to write for money, only 10,000 or so 
are self-employed writers. They receive most of the 
fees, and the rest goes to about 60,000 semiprofessional 
writers. They depend on salaried jobs, often connected 
with writing, for their security. Even if the 10,000 pro- 
fessionals got all the money, their incomes would still 
average only $3,000 to $4,000 a year. 

The amateur and professional write first of aU because 
they want an audience. The professional also writes to 
earn a living, so he can continue his chosen padi of self- 
expression. He is likely to be familiar widi Samuel 
Johnson's observadon that "No man but a blockhead 
ever wrote except for money." 

Many persons diink of a writer as living a glamorous 
life, lunching with other great audiors, or turning out 
a novel while relaxing at some faraway resort. But 
there is more to writing dian a literary cocktail party. 
Wriung is perhaps die loneliest of all professions. It 
requires a concentrated effort of mind and will, and 
most authors prefer to work in isolation. 

The requisites for success in vwiting are an above- 
average mental capacity for observing and comprehend- 
ing life and experience, a talent for using words in 
meaningful ways, and an irresistible urge to put those 
words on paper. This last quality is the most important 
of all. No amount of brilliance or skill can serve to 




Northwestern University 

Special Writing Courses teach journalism students the basic 
writing methods used in newspapers and other writing fields. 



make a writer unless he has the creative impulse to 
sit down and go to work — and keep working hard. 

Creative Writing 

Novels. Almost everyone who tries to write creatively 
sooner or later tries to write a novel. His first work is 
often autobiographical, or partly so, although he may 
try to hide that fact. Trying to write a novel is a worth- 
while step in any author's development. From it, he 
can learn a great deal about how to make a narrative 
flow; how to handle atmosphere, characterization, and 
dialogue; and how to work out a plot. If his book is 
published, he can build an audience for fumre works. 
If it receives good reviews, he can gain prestige. 

Any piece of sustained prose fiction more dian 50,000 
words long is considered a novel today. The average 
novel contains about 80,000 words. A few writers can 
write as much as 3,000 words a day, but most average 
closer to 3,000 a week. Writing any novel, including 
the first draft, rewriting, and polishing, is a job that 
must usually be measured in mondrs or even years. 

The chances of achieving financial success with a 
first novel are slim. A sale of as few as 3,000 copies — 
when the publisher loses money — is quite common. An 
author who receives a 10 per cent royalty on each copy 
sold would make only $] ,200 on that many sales of a $4 
book. But some first novels have sold 50,000 or more 
copies, and writers always dream of an extra $250,000 
or $300,000 for film rights, $50,000 or more for paper- 
back republication rights, and similar large amounts 
for book-club sales. 



423 



WRITING 

Plays offer another rich field for the successful writer. 
Many aspiring dramatists dream of seeing their plays 
on the Broadway stage. Of the 6,000 or more new plays 
registered every year with the copyright office, only 
about 70 or 80 actually go into production in New 
York, and only about a dozen are successful. 

Writing a play differs considerably from writing a 
novel. It takes no more than about 120 pages of manu- 
script, compared with the hundreds a novel takes. It 
also requires special writing techniques, because it is 
entirely dialogue, not counting stage directions, and 
is designed to be put on before an audience. The 
novelist can tell his story at leisure, but the playwright 
must crowd his entire story into the space of a few 
hours. He must also keep his audience on the edge of 
their seats while he does it. 

Scripts. Radio, television, and screen writing draw 
their basic themes and materials from the stage, but 
each has its own special problems. Like plays, scripts 
depend on a well-constructed dramatic plot, well- 
developed characterizations, believable dialogue, and 
sequences of scenes that tell a suspenseful story. Radio 
and television producers buy heavily from free-lance 
writers, but sometimes commission adaptations of plays 
or novels. Film producers look for good original scripts, 
but rely on their staff' writers for the majority of their 
screen scripts. 

Poetry is the least profitable branch of creative 
writing for the writer, as far as money goes. The leading 
magazine in the field. Poetry, pays only a nominal rate, 
even to celebrated contributors. But poetry is also 
the writer's greatest challenge, if he strives for technical 
excellence in making words convey intense meanings. 
There is a modest market for poetry in some magazines 
and newspapers, as well as in the little magazines 
(small circulation magazines that print experimental 
writing). If a poet publishes enough good verse, some 
publisher may turn it into a book. Books of poetry 
rarely sell well, but most poets gladly setde for the 
prestige of book publication. 

Short Stories offer the creative writer the greatest 
opportunities. Thousands of magazines need stories, 
and pay from half a cent per word (in cheaper maga- 
zines, often called pulps) to thousands of dollars for a 
single story (in the slick magazines). As in the case of the 
novel, the short story is always in line for sale to a 
motion-picture or television producer. 

Journalism 

Writing for newspapers attracts about 5,000 gradu- 
ates of schools of journalism each year in the United 
States. Many of the newcomers stay with the newspaper 
profession, while others use the experience as a step- 
pingstone to other jobs in mass communications. The 
candidate for c reporter's job must be able to write 
interestingly and well, and to dig out facts and report 
them quickly and accurately. 

Some newspapermen specialize in such fields as poli- 
tics, crime, religion, science, sports, business, or society 
reporting. Specialists usually write a signed column, 
and devote their time exclusively to that task. They 
and the editorial writers are generally among die better- 
paid writers on die staff. Experienced reporters on 



larger newspapers may command up to $200 a week, 
but pay on the smaller daily papers may range down to 
SI 40 a week. A beginner in the newspaper field may 
make SI 00 a week or more on a metropolitan news- 
paper, and $50 to $100 a week on a smaller paper. 

Newspapers offer some opportunities for free-lance 
writers, usually in supplements to Sunday editions, but 
most often in feature or nonfiction articles. 

Other Kinds of Writing 

Writing for Children attracts many writers, most of 
them on a part-time basis. The markets for children's 
literature include children's magazines and juvenile 
books. Rates of pay in the magazines are generally 
lower than in adult magazines, but the pathway to 
print is sometimes easier. Successful children's books 
generally outsell adult books. They stay in print year 
after year as new readers "grow into" them. 

Critical Writing sometimes appeals to aspiring writers 
with special interests, but it offers few opportunities as 
a full-time career. Surveys of criticism in the United 
States indicate that about 2,000 persons make all or 
most of their living by writing criticisms of books, radio 
and television, or the arts. The market for free-lance 
criticism is limited mosdy to reviewing books. 

Scholarly Essays, or "think pieces," as editors some- 
times call them, are also a limited field, and are usually 
produced on a part-time basis. Magazine editors some- 
times welcome these articles, but only if they are well 
written and well thought out. 

Careers in Writing 

If there is anything certain about the writing field, 
it is that there are few "born" writers. .Success in writing 
for publication comes from laborious practice in writing 
and from gradual development in literary skills and 
techniques. An aspiring writer should have some other 
job to live on until he has learned something about the 
craft. Training in a school of journalism, or part-time or 
full-time work on a neighborhood or hometown news- 
paper, can lead to a reporter's job. Newspaper work can 
pave the way for writing jobs in television, advertising, 
publicity, and the thousands of other jobs where writing 
ability is an asset or a must. 

A writer who wants an independent professional 
career will manage to find the time to develop his work 
to the selling stage outside his "bread and butter" 
work. Until he has developed some sales potential, he 
should submit his own works, and not worry about 
finding an agent. A good literary agent gets a 10 per 
cent commission on each work sold, and is seldom 
interested in an author unless he has proved himself 

Each manuscript submitted to an editor should be 
accompanied by a stamped, self-addressed envelope, in 
case it is rejected. All authors, even famous ones, have 
manuscripts rejected. No good writer should be dis- 
couraged by a collection of rejection slips. He should 
remember that in few other fields does so much depend 

on his own will and determination. Van Allen Bradley 

Related Articles in World Book include: 

Book Letter Writing Publishing 

Book Review Literature Science Fiction 

Criticism Magazine Short Story 

Drama Newspaper Vocational 

Essay Novel Guidance 
Journalism Poetry 



424 



WRITING developed early in man's history. He had 
already learned to speak to his neighbors, and to use 
gestures to emphasize his ideas. He had learned to 
send signals with the help of fire, smoke, or drums. But 
man also discovered that he could send messages only 
as far as the drum or fire signals would carry, and that 
his words were gone once he spoke them. He could 
only revive them by repeating them. What he needed 
was some way to frame a message in a durable form. 
We call this method writing. 

Counting Sticks have been used in all parts of the 
world. A shepherd could record the exact number of 
sheep in his flock by cutting one notch in his stick for 
each sheep, or by carrying a sack with one pebble for 
each animal. The Inca of Peru tied knots in strings of 
various lengths and colors to keep accounts. Such a 
string was called a quipu. These methods of keeping 
accounts could not easily be adapted to actual writing. 
Rock Drawings conveyed a clearer meaning, but 
were not so useful for counting. A simple rock drawing 
was found near a dangerously steep trail in New Mexico. 
The design shows a mountain goat and a man riding a 
horse. The mountain goat stands on all fours, but the 
horse and rider are upside down. The design warns a 
horseman that a mountain goat can climb the rocky 
trail, but that his horse cannot. 

Ideographs. The characteristic feature of this Indian 
drawing, and of any primitive drawing, is that it ex- 
presses a group of ideas without any clear connection 
with any language. Any other person can understand 
it, whether or not he speaks the language of the man 
who drew it. This way of expressing ideas, not neces- 
sarily in words, is called ideography. Pictures drawn for 
the purpose of communication differ only slightly from 
pictures drawn for artistic purposes. Communication 
pictures are simplified and stereotyped, with no details 
that are not needed as part of the communication. 

Logographs. Man took the decisive step in develop- 
ing real writing when he learned that he could express 
ideas indirectly. He did this by using signs that stood 
for the words in his language, not the ideas the words 
stood for. This kind of writing is called logography. To 
see how it works, take such a message as "The king 
killed a lion." In ideography, the message would in- 
clude two drawings, one showing a man with the 
insignia of his office, such as a crown, holding a spear 
in his hand, and the other showing a lion. Logography, 
or word writing, would express the same message by 
signs that stand for the words themselves. One picture, 
of a man wearing a crown, stands for the word "king." 
A spear stands for the word "kill," and a drawing of a 
lion stands for "lion." If the king had killed three lions, 
the phrase "three lions" would be expressed in word 
writing by two signs, one standing for the numeral 
"three" and the other for "lion." In ideography, the 
message would have to contain pictures of three lions. 
Early in the development of this kind of writing, the 
pictures became conventional , or simplified and formal. 
They often showed only a part for the whole, a crown 
for the word "king," or the head of a lion for the word 
"lion." But pictures cannot represent words like "the" 
or "a," nor can they represent grammatical endings like 
the "-ed" of "killed." 

The Sumerians, who lived in southern Mesopotamia, 
were the first people to reach the stage of a primitive 



WRITING 

word writing, about 3100 b.c. They kept records with 
such simple entries as "10 arrows" and the sign for a 
personal name, or "5 cows" and the sign for another 
name. They could easily use signs for numbers and for 
items such as arrows or cows. But they had difficulty 
in writing personal names and abstract notions. 

Phonelizalion. To overcome these problems, the 
Sumerians found that they could use word-symbols of 
objects that were easy to picture, like "arrow," to 
stand for words that sounded similar, but were hard to 
picture. The sign for "arrow" could also stand for "life," 
because the word ti means both things in Sumerian. 
This principle of phonetization, often called the rebus 
principle, is the most important single step in the his- 
tory of writing (see Rebus). If the arrow sign could stand 
for both "arrow" and "life," because they are both pro- 
nounced /;, why not use the arrow sign for the sound ti 
wherever it occurs, regardless of its meaning? The 
Sumerian language was made up largely of one-syllable 
words, so it was not difficult for the people to work out 
a syllabary of about one hundred phonetic signs. 

Sumerian writing is called logo-syllabic, or word-syllab- 
ic. It uses both logograms, or word signs, and syllabo- 
grams, or syllabic signs. Logograms expressed most of 
the words in the language, and syllabograms expressed 
rare and abstract words and proper names. Sumerian 
writing gradually developed the wedgeiike appearance 
we call cuneiform. The Babylonians and Ass^Tians bor- 
rowed cuneiform from the Sumerians, and the Hittites 
and other peoples learned it from them (see Cunei- 
form). 

The Egyptians developed another important word- 
syllabic writing, hieroglyphic, about 3000 B.C. It re- 
sembled Sumerian in using word-signs, but difTered 
in the choice of syllabic signs. The Sumerians regularly 
indicated differences in vowels in their syllabic signs, 
but the Egyptians did not. The Hittites also had a writ- 
ing of their own, hieroglyphic Hittite, that was related to 
some of the systems used in the lands around the Aegean 
Sea. See Hieroglyphic. 

The Chinese, perhaps about 1300 B.C., began the 
most highly developed word writing in the world. The 
peoples of the Middle East usually had only a few hun- 
dred word signs, but the Chinese may have as many as 
50,000. They use some of these signs for the syllables in 
proper names or in foreign words. 

The Alphabet. Men gradually simplified the older 
word-syllable systems. From the complicated Egyptian 
system, the Semites of SyTia, especially the Phoenicians, 
developed simple systems of from 22 to 30 signs, each 
standing for a consonant followed by any vowel. The 
Japanese worked out a syllabic system with symbols for 
an initial consonant and different vowels. They also 
used many word symbols borrowed from Chinese. The 
alphabet was the next step. The Greeks were the first to 
evolve a system of vowel signs, creating the first alpha- 
betic system of writing. i. j. gelb 

Related Articles. See the articles on letters of the 
alphabet. See also the following articles: 

Aegean Civilization Egypt, Ancient Manuscript 

Alphabet (Language) Pictograph 

Babylonia Hittite Rune 

Chinese Language Inca Sumer 



425 




WRITING ROCK 

WRITING ROCK. See North Dakota (Places to 

\'isit). 

WROCtAW, VRAW tslahf, Poland (pop. 442,700; 
alt. 390 ft.), lies 190 miles southwest of Warsaw on the 
Oder River (see Poland [color map]). The city, once 
called Breslau, is a rail junction and river port. 
Wroclaw contains railroad shops; factories for the 
manufacture of chemicals, machinery, and tools; and 
wool, rayon, and paper mills. It is the home of the 
Universirs' of Wroclaw. More than half of the city was 
destroyed in VS'orld War II. M. ka.mil dziewanowski 

WROUGHT IRON. .See Alloy (.'\lloys of Iron); Iron 
AND .Steel (Kinds of Iron and Their Uses). 
WRYNECK. See Rheumatism. 

WRYNECK, or .Snake- 
bird, is a small, motded- 
brown bird that lives in 
Europe. Three of its species 
also live in Africa. The bird 
is related to woodpeckers, 
and nests in the natural 
hollows of trees. When dis- 
turbed, the wryneck thrusts 
its head and neck out of 
its nest and hisses. Its 
name comes from the 
twisting motion of its neck 
\\ hen it does this. The wry- 
neck has soft tail feathers. 
It has a short cone-shaped 
beak and a horny-pointed 
tongue. 

Scientific Classification. The European wrynecks be- 
long to the family Pkidae. They are genus Jynx, species 
J. torqiiiUa. Arthur a. Allen 

WU TAO-TZU (.\.D. 700" s) has the reputation among 
Chinese painters most like that of Michelangelo in 
European art (see Michelangelo). He painted chiefly 
religious subjects on the walls of Buddhist and Taoist 
temples in the Chinese capital of .Sian. He usually 
worked on a very large scale in black and white. His 
murals were destroyed, and we can only imagine his 
style from descriptions and inferior later copies. He was 
born near Loyang, in Honan. Alexander c. Soper 

WUCHANG. See Wuhan. 

WUHAN (pop. 2,500,000; alt. 55 ft.) is the collective 
name for the adjacent cities of Hankow, Hanyang, and 
Wuchang in Hupeh province of China (see China 
[political mapl). The cities are considered a single po- 
litical and economic unit. Wuchang lies on the south 
bank of the Yangtze River. Hankow and Hanyang 
are on the north bank. The Han River separates 
Hankow and Hanyang. The Han River bridge and 
ferries provide transportation between these two cities. 
The Yangtze bridge links "Wuchang with Hanyang. 
Wuhan, an industrial center, was the birthplace of the 

Chinese Revolution in 1911. Theodore h. E. Chen 

WUHSIEN. See Suchou. 

WUNDT, VOONT, WILHELM (1832-1920), a German 
philosopher, became known as the Father of Modern 
Psychology. He founded the first laboratory for experi- 
mental psx'chology in 1879. He considered psychology 
the studv of mental contents. Its methods, he believed. 



The Wryneck, or Snakebird 



included both laboratory experimentation and ir^tro- 
spection (self-observation). Wundt was born at Necka- 

rau, in Baden. Kenneth E. Clark 

WUPATKI NATIONAL MONUMENT, ivoo PAT kih, 
is in northern Arizona. It contains prehistoric dwellings, 
built by farming Indians. The Hopi Indians are be- 
lieved to be partially descended froin them. The 
35,544, 56-acre monument was established in 1924. 

WUTHERING HEIGHTS, a novel by Emily Bronte 
published in 1847, is as stoiTny as its setting on the 
S'orkshire moors. HeathcliflT, adopted into the Earn- 
shaw family, falls in love with Catherine Eamshaw. 
Her brother treats him brutally, and she marries 
another man. Heathcliff becomes master of \Vuthering 
Heights, but finds peace only in death. See also Bronte. 
WYANDOTTE CAVE is a picturesque natural cavern 
in southern Indiana (see Indiana [map]). The cave has 
remarkable stalactite formations, perhaps more than 
are found in Mammoth Cave, in Kentucky. Explorers 
have found 35 miles of underground passages and large 
chambers in Wyandotte Cave. The Pillared Palace in the 
cave contains many clusters of stalactites and stalag- 
mites. Eldred D. Wilson 
WYCHERLEY, WHICH uhr lee, WILLIAM (1640-1 716), 
was an English dramatist of the Restoration period. 
Known as "manly Wycherley," he wrote witty, satirical 
plays called comedies of manners (see English Litera- 
ture [Restoration Drama]). His plays are Love in a 
iroorf(l67l). The Gentleman Dancing-Master (1672), The 
Country Wife (1675), and The Plain Dealer (1676). He 
also wrote poems. Wycherley's family came from Shrop- 
shire, England, but his own birthplace is unknown. He 
was educated in France and at Oxford, and later became 
active in London social life. George f. Sensabaigh 
WYCLIFFE, or WICLIF, UTK lif, JOHN (I320P-1384), 
was an English religious reformer and the first person to 
begin a systemauc translation of the Bible into English. 
He was called the Morning Star of the Reformation, be- 
cause of his protests against certain practices of the 
Roman Catholic Church. 

Little is known of WyclifiTe's early life, but it is be- 
lieved that he was born near Richmond, in Yorkshire, 
England. He studied at Oxford University, where he 
became inaster of Balliol College about 1361. 

Wycliffe found much to 
criticize in the church. He 
believed that it exercised 
too much control over civil 
allairs and was too wealthy. 
He maintained that church 
property should be taken 
o\er and managed by the 
government. He supported 
the antipapal policies of 
John of Gaunt and denied 
the authority of the pope. 
Wycliffe's work won the 
favor of King Edward III. 
In 1374, the king sent him 
to meet representatives of 
Pope Gregory XI at Bruges. Belgium, to setde disputes 
between the English government and the papacy over 
the cjuestion of church authority. 

Opposition to the Church. Soon after Wycliffe re- 
turned to England, he began attacking the doctrines as 




N,^, t.,1 ty Libr: 

John Wycliffe 



426 



well as the established order and hierarchy of the 
church. He strongly attacked the doctrine of Transub- 
stantiation (see Transubstantiation). He held that the 
Bible was the highest source of truth and that it con- 
tained all that was necessary for man's salvation. More 
than 100 years later in Germany, Martin Luther echoed 
some of WyclifTe's beliefs, particularly his emphasis on 
the Bible (see Luther, Martin). 

The church considered WyclifTe's teachings danger- 
ous, and pronounced him a heretic. In 1377, Pope 
Gregory XI issued five papal bulls (decrees) attacking 
him and demanding his imprisonment. But the English 
government refused these demands. 

Translation of the Bible. A peasants' revolt in 1381 
convinced WyclilTe that he should appeal directly to 
the common people. He soon began translating the 
Bible into English, because he thought the people 
needed to read the Bible to know the source of their re- 
ligious beliefs. VVycliffe probably translated the New 
Testament and part of the Old Testament. His asso- 
ciates are believed to have completed the rest of the 
work. The entire translation was issued in 1 388. 

One group of Wycliffe's followers was called poor 
priests, although the men were not members of the 
clergy. VVycliffe instructed them, and they set out on 
foot to spread the message of the Bible. After about 
1387, his followers became known as Lollards. Although 
they were cruelly persecuted, their numbers increased, 
and they helped spread the doctrines of the Reforma- 
tion during the 1500's (see Huss, John; Lollards; 
Reform.^tion). 

Wycliffe died in 1384. In 1428, at the order of Pope 
Martin V, his body was burned and his ashes were 
scattered on the River Swift. George l. Mosse 

WYETH, }VyE eth, is the name of two well-known 
American artists, father and son. 

Newell Convers Wyeth ( 1 882- 1 945) painted historical 
murals and illustrated 20 children's books, including 
Treasure Island and Robinson Crusoe. He was born in 
Needham, Mass., and studied with the noted illustrator, 
Howard Pyle. Wyeth lived with Indians in Colorado 
and New Mexico for a time, and also painted pictures 
of frontier life. For reproductions of his work, see 
Coronado, Francisco; Robin Hood. 

Andrew Wyeth (1917- ), son of Newell Convers 
Wyeth, began to paint in his father's studio at the age 
of 12. He developed a distinctive style which is imagina- 
tively based on realism. His tempera and water-color 
paintings have been widely exhibited. Wyeth was born 
at Chadds Ford, Pa. norm,*n Rice 



WYNN, ED 

WYKOFF, FRANK. See Track and Field (Famous 
Track :ind Field Ciiainpions). 

WYLIE, ELINOR MORTON HOYT (1885-1928), was an 
American poet and novelist. Her book of poems. Nets 
to Catch the Wind (1921), and Jennifer Lorn (1923), a 
brilliantly written novel, brought her recognition. Her 
foiu- books of poems, .Nets to Catch the M^ind, Black 
Armour (1923), Trivial Breath (1928), and Angels and 
Earthly Creatures (1929), with forty-eight uncollected 
poems, were published as Collected Poems in 1932. 
Collected Prose (1933) included the no\eh Jennifer Lorn, 
The Venetian Glass .Nephew (1925), The Orphan Angel 
(1926), Mr. Hodge and Mr. Hazard (\928), and 10 short 
stories and essays. "Velvet Shoes" is her most popular 
single poem, and "Hymn to Earth" and ""This Cor- 
iTjptible" are two of her finest poems. 

Miss Wylie was born in .Somerville, N.J. She grew 
up in Washington, D.C., and published her first book 
of poems. Incidental .Numbers, in England in 1912. She 
married the poet William Rose Benet (see Benet). Her 
beauty and wit became well known in New York 

literaiy society. John Holmes 

WYLIE, PHILIP GORDON (1902- ), is an Amer- 
ican novelist and a critic of contemporary life. His 
Generation of Vipers (1942) gave us the term momism to 
describe the society in which males are dominated 
emotionally by their mothers. This book asserts that 
our culture loses force and maturity because of our 
failure to grow up. An Essay on Morals (1947) is another 
analysis of the American scene. His novels include Tlie 
Corpses at Indian Stones (1943), Tomorrow (1953), and 
Triumph (1963). 

Wylie was born in Beverly, Mass. He attended 
Princeton University, and later became a member of the 
staff of The .New I'orker magazine. Wylie also wrote for 
motion pictures. During World War II, he served in the 
LTnited States Army Air Force. georoe j. Becker 

WYNN, ED (1888- ), a popular stage, television, 
motion-picture, and radio comedian, became known as 
the perfect fool. A master of punning, he won fame 
for his giggle-and-lisp, his up-and-down eyebrows, his 
zany hats, and his baggy clothes. He performed in a 
pair of oversized shoes which he bought in 1907. 

Wynn was born in Philadelphia. His real name was 
Isaiah Edwin Leopold. Wynn wrote many Broadway 
shows and also published more than 100 songs. His son, 
Keenan Wynn, became an actor in motion-pictures and 

on television. Nardi Reeder Campion 



James L. Dillo 




Kosti Ruohomaa, Black Star 



"N.C." and Andrew Wyeth 

won fame as American paint- 
ers. N.C. Wyeth, left, helped 
his son Andrew, right, learn to 
draw and paint. In 1963, An- 
drew Wyeth won the Medal of 
Freedom, the highest U.S. civil- 
ian honor, for his paintings. His 
painting. Her Room, sold for 
$65,000, the highest price 
ever paid by a museum for a 
work by a living American artist. 




:.-3^^^i. 



:1 








ii.' 




Jack Zihit. PubUx 

Jackson Hole Valley in the Teton Mountains of Western Wyoming 



r.»r^:a--*r^:-';.'.ian 





Herding Sheep in the Bighorn Mountains 



428 



Petroleum Refinery in Cody 



WYOMING 




THE EQUALITY STATE 



WYOMING is a state famous for the beauty of its 
mountains. The peaks of the Rocl&lt;y Mountains tower 
over the landscape. Tliey provide the setting for the 
nation's largest and oldest national park — ^ Yellowstone. 
Wyoming has not only the first national park, but also 
the first national monument, Devils Tower, and the 
first national forest, Shoshone. Another famous scenic 
wonder, Grand Teton National Park, includes some of 
(he West's most beautiful mountains. Millions of tour- 
ists visit Wyoming each year to enjoy its sceneiy and 
historic places. 

Not all of Wyoming is moimtainous. Between the 
mountain ranges lie broad, flat, treeless basins. Some of 
these basins are dotted with rugged, lonely towers of 
rock called buttes. In the eastern part of the state, a fiat, 
dry plain stretches westward toward the mountains. 

Wyoming's wealth — cattle and oil — comes from its 
land. More than 80 per cent of the state's land is used 
for grazing. Thousands of oil wells dot the prairies. Visi- 
tors may see a white-face steer cropping the grass near a 
pumping oil well. Petroleum, natural gas, and other 
minerals make Wyoming one of the leading states in 
mining. Wyoming also ranks as a leader in the produc- 
tion of bentonite, a special clay used in oil well drilling; 
trona, a mineral with wide use in the chemical industry; 
and uranium, the raw material of atomic power. 

The federal government owns almost half the land 



in Wyoming. Since the state depends mostly on its land, 
this makes the government especially important in 
Wyoming's economy. Federal agencies control grazing, 
logging, and mining on the government land. 

Wyoming has attracted travelers since the earliest 
days of white settlement. Three of the great pioneer 
trails of the American West cross Wyoming. The Cali- 
fornia, Mormon, and Oregon trails all took the covered 
wagons through South Pass. This pass became famous 
as the easiest way for the pioneers to cross the motm- 
tains. 

Millions of persons have crossed Wyoming, but 
relatively few have stayed. Of the 50 states, only 
Alaska and Nevada have fewer people, according to 
the 1960 census. Wyoming's capital and largest city, 
Cheyenne, has a population of less than 50,000. 

The word Wyoming comes from a Delaware Indian 
word meaning upon the great plain. Wyoming is nick- 
named the Equality State because Wyoming women 
were the first in the nation to vote, hold public office, 
and serve on juries. In 1870, Wyoming's Esther H. 
Morris became the nation's first woman justice of the 
peace. In 1924, Wyoming voters elected the first woman 
governor, Mrs. Nellie Tayloe Ross. 

For the relationship of Wyoming to the other states in 
its region, see the article on the RocKV Mount.ain 
States. 



The contributors of this article are James M. Flinchum, 
editor of the Wyoming State Tribime of Cheyenne; T. A. 
Larson, Head oj the Department of History and Director of 
the School of American Studies at the University of Wyoming; 
and J. David Love, supervisor of the Laramie, IVyoming, office 
of the U.S. Geological Survey. Photographs are World Book 
photos by James R. Simon unless otherwise indicated. 



FACTS IN BRIEF 




Wyoming (blue) ranks ninth in size among all the states, and 
fourth in size among the Rocl&lt;y Mountain States (gray). 



Capital: Cheyenne. 

Governmenl: Congress — U.S. Senators, 2; U.S. Repre- 
sentatives, 1. Electoral Votes, 3. State Legislature — sena- 
tors, 25; representatives, 61. Counties, 23. looting Age, 
21 years. 

Area: 97,914 square miles (including 503 square miles 
of inland water), 9th in size among the states. Greatest 
Distances: (east-west) 365 miles; (north-south) 275 
miles. 

Elevation: Highest, Gannett Peak in Fremont County, 
13,785 feet above sea level. Lowest, Belle Fourche 
River in Crook County, 3,100 feet above sea level. 

Population: 330,066 (1960), 48th among the states. Den- 
sity, 3 persons to the square mile. Distribution, urban, 
57 per cent; rural, 43 per cent. Estimated 1965 Popu- 
lation, 357,000. 

Chief Products: Mining, bentonite, coal, iron ore, natural 
gas, petroleum, trona, uranium. .Agriculture, beans, 
cattle, hay, sheep, sugar beets, wheat, wool. Manufac- 
turing, beet sugar, flour, lumber and wood products, 
petroleum products, processed meats, sulfur. 

Statehood: July 10th, 1890, the 44th state. 

Slote Motto: Equal Rights. 

Stote Song: "Wyoming." Words by Charles E. Winter; 
music by G. E. Knapp. 



429 



WYOMING/^^^^^^^^n/ 



Constitution. Wyoming is still governed under its 
original constitution, which was adopted in 1889. The 
constitution has been amended (changed) 25 times. 
Amendments must be approved by a majority of the 
people voting in that particular election. .Amendments 
may be proposed by a two-thirds vote of both houses of 
the legislature, or by a constitutional convention. Such 
a constitutional convention must be approved by two- 
thirds of the legislators of each house, and by a majority 
of the voters. 

Executive. The governor of Wyoming is elected to a 
four-year term. He may be re-elected any number of 
times. The governor is paid $20,000 a year. 

Much of the governor's power lies in his right to ap- 
point other important state officials. For example, he 
appoints the attorney general and the heads of the 
budget and personnel departments. For a list of all the 
governors of Wyoming, see the History section of this 
article. 

The voters elect four other high state officials to four- 
yeai' terms. These are the secretaiy of state, auditor, 
superintendent of public instruction, and treasurer. The 
treasurer may not serve two consecutive tenns, but there 
are no limits on re-election of the others. \Vyoming has 
no lieutenant governor. If the governor dies or resigns, 
the secretary of state serves as governor until a new 
governor is elected. 

Legislature of Wyoming consists of a senate of 25 
members and a house of representatives of 61 members. 
The senators are elected to four-year terms, and the 
representatives to two-year tenns. In 1964, a panel of 
three federal judges ordered Wyoming to draw its 
senate districts for the 1 966 election on the basis of popu- 
lation. As in many other states, the senate had been 
apportioned (divided) so that rural areas had more power 
than the cities. The legislature meets on the second 
Tuesday of January in odd-numbered years. Sessions 
are limited to 40 days. 

Courts. The highest court in Wyoming is the supreme 
court. This court has four justices who are elected to 




Wyomint.. Travel Commission 

Governor's Mansion in Cheyenne stands southeast of the 
Capitol. The red bricl&lt; building was built in the Georgian Colonial 
style. Four impressive white columns flank the main entrance. 



eight-year terms. The justice with the shortest time re- 
maining in his term sei'ves as chief justice. The supreme 
court usually hears only cases that have been appealed 
from lower courts. Most major civil and criminal trials 
are held in district courts. The state has seven judicial 
districts, each with one or two district judges who are 
elected to sLx-year terms. Other courts in Wyoming in- 
clude police courts, municipal courts, and justice-of-the- 
peace courts. 

Local Government. Wyoming has 23 counties, each 
governed by a board of three commissioners. The com- 
missioners are elected to four-year tenns. The state 
constitution forbids giving special charters to cities. 
However, Wyoming cities have a wide choice in the 
form of their governments. Most have the mayor-coun- 
cil form. Casper, Laramie, and .Sheridan employ city 
managers. By state law, a city must have 4,000 resi- 



Wyoming Travel Commission 




State Legislature meets in the Capitol 
in odd-numbered years. The members of 
the house of representatives, \eft, meet 
in the east wing. The senators meet in the 
west wing of the Capitol. 



430 




The State Seal 



Symbols of Wyoming. On the seal, the woman and the motto 
symbolize the equal rights women have had in the state. The two 
men represent Wyoming's livestock and mining industries. The 
dates ore those on which Wyoming became a territory and a 
state. The seal was adopted in 1 893. The flag, adopted in 1917, 
shows the seal on a buffalo to represent the branding of livestock. 
The red border symbolizes Indians and the blood of the pioneers. 

Bird and flower illustrations, courtesy of Eli Lilly and Company 



dents. Communities with populations between 150 and 
4.000 are called towns. 

Taxafion provides slightly more than half the state 
government's income. Sales taxes, license fees, and prop- 
erty taxes, in that order, bring in the most money. 
Almost all the rest of the state government's income 
comes from federal grants and other U.S. government 
programs. 

Politics. In state and local elections, Republicans 
have won two-thirds of the contests since 1890, but 
Democrats often win major offices. The cities of south- 
ern Wyoming are a major source of Democratic 
strength. Republicans usually get more votes from the 
northern covmties, which are largely rural. 

In presidential elections, Wyoming has given its 
electoral votes to Republican and Democratic candi- 
dates about equally since the early I930's. For Wyo- 
ming's electoral votes and voting record in presidential 
elections, see Electoral College (table). 



State Capitol in Cheyenne is a massive sandstone building. The 
dome is 50 feet in diameter and towers 145 feet above the 
ground. Cheyenne became the capital of Wyoming in 1 869. 





The State Bird 

Meadow Lark 




The State Flower 

Indian Paintbrush 



The State Tree 

Cottonwood 




KOCH MTNl r\ &lt; ^\ + ' rV ' tZ799FT ' ^V 

MT iHOLMESm 



tieogen V^-?^'^ ft + 



TfiRGHEE- 
7,078 FT. 




^P^P'(S+ip,040FT /iffclNNACLE Pk DOUBLETOR PK. t B ^ 

■^^ ^S A N O £■ Jgr "0,775 FT +' 1 7 I 5 FT. [' -. ^DOWNS MIN,.&gt;- 

SHEEP 
_ II. fid 

pondurant 



&gt; 



^lll^i^ioqt SHEEP MTS, 
^.1 "fe*^ 10 626 FT 



110" 



Red Lodge pi ,„ '°Aj 
+GRANITE PK.- " -^ __7oWashoe(l\ 



.%. 



&gt;:y / WestT 
\ '^Xellpws one 

i9.2nji. ; { ; 
.1"-" t'o!^ 



yBt-LOWsh-ONE \ 

^Canyon I 

yefioMgfoni 



;»»* 



huD FAITHFUL\ \ \ 

•V Faithful ' -NS /T-*" \ SYLVAN 

bnoshone 'I I ' ' 

L. Lewis , y 4. , », to, 

L. &gt;^j; ,He&lt;irtt. •E-'ISHAW 



' ^?7?Y 



® 



_ ^Franni.e '""^^ '^ 

.0,2, F,,VJ\ 4VlV0'»^'^ L Garland .,L^^Kane»J S sJd MT?- 




Daytort 



DEAD. V- 

NOIAN PK. 

12 216FT+ ^TR0aTLPK,H2.Z44 FT/ 

_ P \^--A \ X 



-Ralston^ 



Bi^ron^ 



^'^^ 



Cody 
t / Bu-ffalo 



TE;TON'i 



Sorth Fork 

PTARMIGAN MTN 

12 250 FT . U^ y^ L. \ "-■■ 

P &lt;V^ Ishawooa-^ 
■ / 






/'P 



J Jacks on Lake 

(iNACLi BUTi'E 

*"-"°f iio: :^rh?," ^'^- 



^^^ . , , ■ Wplf 

030fT.+ ,^^ f ^^■"^ P 

- blackImi^T. / 

HtlNTl MTN *• I ' 

CEDAR MTN + f *i2|^ 

„ \ 9 B05&gt;Tr:i-J '^- 



Mandersolr ^ 



Gooseberrj/ q 



+ 13 no FT. .(ft ; D 



&gt; ■ Dickii 

rass Creek 

WIGGINS rx:\!'''- CROSBY Va^ , 

Hamilton-Borneo '^° 

nLs*?!"""" WASHAKIE S P -'R;CiK 
' ' "'^ "^^ NEEDLES y WiJ' 




^yattville 



vk, 



I 
O I Ten SleepA 



0/ 



&gt;r^nd^ 



K \:ru 



&gt;\ 



D(incan, i'2''''s 



^^^ 



Palisades 
, flee. I 

;®CARie0U MT 
+ D,9 805 ft! I 

■* J^q;-— ^ — Sf *-^ 

"I'Frppdnm 



/^ Thayne A -a ^ 

/ &gt;Bediordi° 

\ ; T ja-over* , _ 

h ■ . • \ \° KU^^ I0j900 FT, 

Farrview M ntion^ 
Osmond 
. M^. I ' 

+■ • • ' I 
MEADE fK. 
,9.95J FT, 



_^ -4 A' G £■ 

f^\ SHEEP'MTN + ! 



OIO,I43 FT 
+ MT MCD0U6AL- \V 

»io763 FT ^ Danten 



GANNETT PK 
1 3 785 FT 
FREMONT PK . 
13 730 FT \ 



'jLake- ' + mt hal 



1 1,850 Ft. 



innt ? +?«yOMING PK. &gt; 



AlT* ISAftEL 
10.155 FJ 



FONTENELLE.H- U+ 
MTN lO.OSJ FT, "^ 



BALD KNOLL 
10,324 FT 




,r%^£^lpet/ 



^^Jk' ''~t 

Big^adj' *■ ■, ! + 

^^TLANTie PEAK 
,V._--'^-'3&lt;FT. 



[pig Satidy w 
V . Res. ;* 



Ran&lt;)q( 



i Fort , 

X,, To,^ ' ft Bridger, Ly; 

'' — ^j_LLfc^^ I 

1 •. ^Pifidmont^M^ 
&lt;o. o // 

-Aspen /OfRobertson 




-Crowheart 

DIVERSION OA 

s' 

Lake 



FT. 



Cr. 



+ , 66^'™°'''°''^==* Thfrm&lt;ipolis "" \ I 



rm,f4^ 



^J^ 



B R I D G E R! 



"^^v 



Boysen 



'o.— o Pa^rtUQp 
FTR oN|^M 0" 
O Fort Washakiel 'tSthete^*^-*' 



^Plost ! 



.^dwaler ^ 



JSbcshoni 



Lys'^^/"^'" Madden 



Wind^ Arapa&gt; 
River 



-» LIZARD HEAD PK;^ 

'2-"2^FT, •- I Lander^ 



St. Stephens 



Sand 
-iV Draw o 



1 JJ&gt;29 FT. 



o^fi" 



|N;S' 



SOUTH PASS^ £- ^ ■ 
,J'550FT. rl » , L ■• = .iENT^L 



^ 



^i 




4/" 



^3 ^ 

! s ■• 3 -Si 
- -. ^..^. 

ELIZABETH MTN 
to, 353 FT. 



W i E E 

"v.Stansbury 
Rejiance&gt; 



TWA 
°^Superior 

S. Superior ,fg(,|g 



Muddy GafpV 
e R £ £■ Al V^**/J 



&gt;f^7" S. 6 v„r- . 

- Bairoil rPU-aiTmr\&lt;- 



, Blairtowr 
Peru &gt;5x^ i°Quealy 



.^Tttayer ^o.nt ^^Ipto 

Jiiinction ot Rocks 



Burntfork 



TFIAMING GORGE "l 



JiJ° ^ +13^22 FT, J&gt;7?f ^. / i ^ 



O- + 7 66 3 FT. 

Bitter Creek 



V\ amsipter * 





JTt 



I -^ 



107° '-- 



WYOMING 

^ State Capital 
o Ottier Cities 
o County Seat 
O City Limits 
County line 
1 incfl 




HIGHWAYS 

Expressways 

Major Roads 

■ Other Roods 

© U.S. 

(jp Not. Interstate 

35 Statute lilies 

20 30 40 




^litviDE rt. 

ij 06ti FT. 

^ I e 

-«i PRIDGER PK 

"7+11 007 ^ " \ .^ O '1 

■^1 ^iFT ffiver--^- V^ O aAlban^ ,^ , . 

•^ ^ iside \'-, V, A uAKE^'Mrtt: U&gt;-&gt;2 • ' ••Baford"**^— i OM 

4 '"^ " J. Woo^SUpding •,■§,■ x«.N^^!%=^ 

® Q,'" ® a la p®t\® - . \"°7'-oS;?r 

^ MT ZIRKEL [., ,.' '■ ls|i, 

lOT" 



WYOMING MAP INDEX 



Population 

357.000 . . Estimate 1963 

330.066 I960 

290.529 1950 

250.742 I9J0 

225.565 1930 

J94.402 J920 

145.965 1910 

92.531 1900 

62.555 , IB93 

20.789 1880 

9.118 1870 

Counties 

Albany 21.290 E 7 

Big Horn . .11.898. .B 4 

Campbell . . .5,861 B 7 

Carbon ... 14,937. E 5 

Converse . . . .6.366 C 7 

Crook 4.691 B 8 

Fremont .. .26.168 C 4 

Goslien 11.941 . .D 8 

Hot Springs .6.365. .C 4 

Jollnson . . . 5.475. B 6 

Laramie . . .60.149 E 8 

Lincoln 9.018 D 2 

Natrona ... 49.623. D 6 

Niobrara . 3.750. C 8 

Park 16.874. B 3 

Platte 7.195. .D 7 

Sheridan ,18.989 B 5 

Sublette 3.778 D 2 

Sweetwater .17.920 E 3 

Teton 3.062 C 2 

Uinta 7.484. .E 2 

Wastiakie 8.883 C 5 

Weston 7.929..C 8 

Yellowstone 

National 

Park (part) 420 . B 2 

Cities and Towns 

Acme 125. .B 5 

Afton 1.337 2 

Aladdin* 10 B 8 

Albany 100 E 6 

Albln 172 E 8 

Alcova 75 D 6 

Almy 25 E I 

Alpine* 25. .D 2 

Altamont* 25 E 2 

Alva 60 B 8 

Arapahoe 30. .D 4 

Archer- 20. E 8 

Arminto 15. .C 5 

Arvada 100. .B 6 

Aspen 45. E 2 

Atlantic City .25 D 4 

Auburn 100. . D 2 

Badger Basin B 3 

Badwater C 5 

Baggs 199. E 5 

Bairoil 300 .D 5 

Banner 10 B 6 

Basin 1.319 °B 4 

Bedford 75 2 

Beulah* 45 B 8 

Big Horn 100. .8 5 

Big Piney . . . .663. .D 2 

Bill 10. -0 7 

Bitter Creek . ..70..E 4 

Black Buttes- .20. E 4 

Blairtown E 3 

Bondurant 35. .C 2 

Bonneville 50.. C 4 

Border D I 

Boslcr 75 ..E 7 

Boulder 30.. D 3 

Boysen* 50. C 4 

Bright C 8 

Bryan 10. E 3 

Buckhorn B 8 

Bucknum C S 

Buffalo 2.907.08 6 

Buford 20. E 7 

Burlington . . .100, .B 4 

Burns 225. .E 8 

Burntfork E 3 

Burris 10. .C 3 

Byron 417. .B 4 

Calpct 65. .D 2 

Careyhurst D 7 

Carhlc 5 B 8 

Carpenter ,...100 E 8 

Carter 85 E 2 

Casper 38.930 "D 6 

Cassa 5..D 8 

Centennial ... .50 E 6 

Cheyenne . .43.505 °E 8 

Chugwater . 287. ,E 8 

Church Buttes .5 E 2 

Clareton 5,.C 8 

Clark 10. B 3 

Clay Spur 15. .B 8 

Clearmont .... 154 . B 6 

Cody 4,838 OB 3 

Cokeville . . .545 .D 2 

Columbine 20 C 6 

Cooper Lake . . .20. E 7 

Cora 5 D 3 

Cowley 459, ,B 4 

Creston 15.. E 5 

Crowheart 5 C 3 

Daniel 110 .D 2 



333 
121 

10 
398 

15 
108 



Oayton . 

Deaver 

Devils Tower 
Diamondvillc 
Dickie . - 

Dixon 

Dogie 

Douglas 2 

Dubois 
Dull Center 

Duncan 

Durham . . 

Dwyer 

East Thermopo- 

lis 281 

Eden 220 

Edgerton ... 512 

Edson* 15 

Egbert 85 

Elk 15 



B 
B 
B 

E 
C 
E 
C 
822 OD 
574 C 
C 

C 

.20. .E 
.20 D 



Elk Mountain 190. 

Elkol 25, 

Elmo 91 . 

Emblem 5 

Encampment 333. 



Frannie 

Freedom 

Frewen 

Frontier 

Garland 



171 
. .25 
. .10 

500. 

,50. 



Garrett 5 D 

Gas Hills* . .400 C 

Gebo 80. C 

Gillette 3.580 &lt;&gt;B 

Glendo , 292 D 

Glenrock .... 1,584. D 

Goose Egg D 

Granger . 159. .E 

Granrte Canon .30. .E 
Grass Creek . .60. .C 
Green River 3,497 oe 
Greybull .. 2.286. B 

G rover I 20 . . D 

Guernsey 800. . D 

Hamilton 

Dome 150. -C 

Hampton E 

Hamsfork D 

Hanna 625 E 

Harriman* ... .25 E 

Hartville 177. D 

Hat Creek 5. D 

Hawk Springs 125 

Hiland 10 

Hillsdale 100 



Holmes 15. 

Horse Creek . . 100. 
Hudson ., .369. 

Hulett 335 

Huntley 75. 

Hyattville 50. 

Iron Mountain ,15. 

Ishawooa B 

Jackson 1.437 oq 

Jay Em 30. D 

Jeffrey City 

( Home on the 

Range)* , ,. 750. D 

Jelm 5,,E 

Kanda E 

Kane 20. .B 

Kaycee 284, .C 

Keeline 30 -D 

Kelly 20 C 

Kemmerer . .2,028 OE 
Kinnear . .50 C 

Kirby 82. C 

Kirtley D 

Kyle E 

La Barge 700 D 

Lagrange .176. . E 

Lament 100 D 

Lance Creek . 500 C 
Lander .4,182 oq 

Laramie . 17,520 OE 

Latham 25. . E 

Leiter 5. . B 

Leo 

Linch 600- 

Lingle 437. 

Little America .75 



Lonctrce 
Lookout 
Lost Cabin 
Lost Springs 

Lovell 2.451, B 

Lucerne , , .25. .C 

Lusk 1,890 OD 

Lyman 425. .E 



Elk Basin B 4 



Esterbrook D 7 



30. C 

. . 1 00 . C 

4,901 OE 

- 678 -D 

100 D 

. . .20 -D 

,IO..E 



Ethete 

Etna 

Evanston 

Evansville 

Fairview 

Farson . 

Federal 

Flattop D 

Fort Bridger .150. 
Fort Fred 

Steele- 40 

Fort Laramie .233 
Fort Washakie 130 
Four Corners 5 
Fox Farm* . . 1,371 . 
Foxpark 150. 



Himes B 4 




Wyuminfi Travel Commission 

A Crowd of Rodeo Fans watches the annual Frontier Days celebration in 
Cheyenne. The people of Wyoming sponsor many such events to show their 
pride in the state's pioneer and "Wild West" heritage. 



Lysite 70. .C 5 

Madden C 5 

Manderson .167 B 5 

Manville 124 D 8 

Marblclon .189 D 2 

Marshall D 7 

McFaddcn .150 E 6 

McKinley . 35 - D 7 

McKinnon . . 10. .E 3 

Medicine Bow 392. E 6 

Meetcctse 514. B 4 

Meriden 5. E 8 

Merna D 2 

Midwest 1.000. C 6 

Midwest 

Heights* . . . .60. D 6 

Mills 1.477 D 6 

Moneta . . . 10. C 5 

Moorcroft . . 826. B 8 

Moose 15 C 2 

Moran 10. C 2 

Morton . 15. C 4 

Moskee 15. B 8 

Mountain 

View 1,721 D 6 

Mountain View 400. .E 2 

Muddy Gap 15 D 5 

Mule Creek 30. C 8 

Natrona 5.C 6 

New Haven . . .15 B 8 

Newcastle . .4.345 "C 8 

Node 15 D 8 

Old Faithful . 8 2 

Goal 55. ,E 2 

Orchard 

Valley 1,449. ,E 8 

Orin 5.0 7 

Orpha 15 D 7 

Osage 350 C 8 

Oshoto 10 B 8 

Osmond 2 

Otto 50. .8 4 

Pahaska 10 B 3 

Parkerton . . .50 D 7 

Parkman 25 B 5 

Pavillion 190 C 4 



Piedmont 10. 


F 


? 


Pine Bluffs .1,121 


1- 


H 


Pinedale . .965 


on 


3 


Point of Rocks .55. 


1- 


4 


Powder River .50. 


r 


6 


Powell 4.740 


K 


4 


Quealy 42. 


.E 


3 


Ralston 20. 


K 


4 


Ramsey* 15 


E 


6 


Ranchester ...235. 


B 


h 


Rawlins . , . .8,968 


OE 


5 


Recluse 15. 


B 


7 


Red Buttes 15, 


F 


7 


Red Desert ,.,,30, 


.t 


4 


Reliance 300, 


L 


3 


Riner 15 


E 


5 


Riverside 87, 


t 


6 


Riverton ,,..6,845. 


C. 


4 


Robertson 15. 


b 


2 


Rock River ,..497. 


E 


7 


Rock 






Springs ..10.371. 


,E 


3 


Rockypoint 25. 


U 


7 


Rozet 15. 


B 


7 


Ryan Park .100. 


t 


6 


Saddlestnng ....5. 


B 


6 








St. Stephens ... 5. 


D 


4 


Sand Draw . . .80. 


1) 


4 


Saratoga .,.1.133. 


.E 


6 


Savery 25 , 


b 


,■) 




K 


8 


Seminoe Dam ,55. 


D 


6 


Shawnee 18, 


D 


K 


Shell 50. 


B 


.■i 


Sheridan , ,,11.651 


OB 


6 


Shoshoni 766, 


C 


4 


Sinclair 621. 


F 


5 


Slater 15. 


F 


8 


Smoot 100. 


II 


■■&gt; 


South Pass City 15. 


D 


4 


South Superior 401 . 


k 


4 


South Torring- 






ton 1,000. 


D 


8 


Spotted Horse 10. 


B 


7 


Stansbury 50. 


E 


3 



434 



*Docs not appear on the map; key shows general location. 



Story 200. .B 6 

Stroner 5.,B 7 

Sundance . . . .908 OB 8 

Sunrise 300, D 8 

Sunshine B 4 

Superior 24 1,, E 4 

Sussex 5.,C 6 

Table Rock 5,,E 4 

Ten Sleep . , . .314. ,B 5 

Thayer Junction 20,, E 4 

Thayne 214. D 2 

Thermopolis .3,955.oc 4 

Thornton B 8 

Tie Siding 50 .E 7 

Tipton 35. E 4 

Torrington . 4,188 oD 8 

Turncrcrest C 7 

Turnerville . . . 50. ,0 2 

Ucross 25, ,B 6 

Ulm 25. ,B 6 

Upton I.224.,B 8 

Valley 15. ,B 3 

Van Tassell .15 ,D 8 

Verne 20, ,E 2 

Verse C 7 

Veteran 40, E 8 

Walcott 30 ,E 6 

Waltman 5..C 5 

Wamsutter .110. .E 5 

Wapiti 15 B 3 

Wendover D 8 

Weston 5. B 7 

Wcstvaco 10. E 3 

Wheatland 2,350 OD 8 

Wilcox* 15 -E 7 

Wilson 35. C 2 

Winchester .. 20. C 4 

Wind River D 4 

Wolf 40. .8 5 

Woods Landing . , . . E 7 

Worland ...5,806 ob 5 

Wyarno 20. ,B 6 

Wyodak 60,, B 7 

Yellowstone 

Park 300, B 2 

Yoder 83.. E 8 

oindicates County Seat. 
Source: Latest census figures. 



WYOMING 



People 



The 1960 United States census reported that Wyo- 
ming had 330,066 persons. This was an increase of 14 
per cent over the 1950 figure of 290,529. The U.S. 
Bureau of the Census estimated that by 1965 the state's 
population had reached 357,000. 

A little more than half of Wyoming's people live in 
cities. Most of the cities are small compared with those 
in other states. Cheyenne, the capital and largest city, 
and Casper, the second largest city, both have fewer 
than 50,000 persons. The next three cities, in order of 
size, are Laramie, Sheridan, and Rock Springs. About 
a fourth of the state's people live in cities along 
a single major highway and rail line in southern 
Wyoming. See the separate articles on the cities of 
Wyoming listed in the Related Articles at the end of 
this article. 

About 97 of every 100 persons in Wyoming were born 
in the United States. Wyoming has about 4,000 Indi- 
ans, most of whom live on the Wind River reservation 
near' Riverton. 

A majority of the people of Wyoming are Protestants. 
The largest religious groups in Wyoming include 
Baptists, Congregationalists, Episcopalians, Lutherans, 
Methodists, members of the Chinch of Jesus Christ of 
Latter-day Saints (Momions), Presbyterians, and Ro- 
man Catholics. 



POPULATION 

This map shows the population density of Wyoming, and how it 
varies in different parts of the state. Population density means 
the average number of persons who live on each square mile. 

PERSONS PER SQUARE MILE 




WORLD BOOK map 



100 Kilometers 



WYO'^'NG/Educaf/on 



Schools. The first school in Wyoming was founded at 
Fort Laramie in 1852. William V'aux, the chaplain of 
the fort, started the school. In 1860, a school was built at 
Fort Bridget, and its students began their studies the 
same year. In 1869, the territorial legislatme passed a 
law providing tax support for schools. There were 
district schools in many communities after 1870. The 
state's first high school opened in Cheyenne in 1875. 

Wyoming's public school system is supei"vised by an 
elected state superintendent of public instruction. A six- 
member board of education, appointed by the super- 
intendent, helps make school policies. Most of the 
money to run the school system comes from property 
taxes. Income from certain state-owned land also is used 
to support schools. 

Children are required to attend school either between 
the ages of 7 and 1 7, or until they complete the eighth 
grade. Wyoming has one of the highest percentages in the 
United States of persons who can read and write. For 
the number of students and teachers in Wyoming, see 
Education (table). 

The Universit)' of Wyoming is the state's only ac- 
credited four-year university. It was founded at Laramie 
in 1887 and is supported by the state. Several junior 
colleges in other parts of the state ofTer students two 
years of college-level study. 

Libraries and Museums. In 1886. Wyoming's ter- 
ritorial legislature passed laws jjroviding for a system of 
free county libraries. Today, each of Wyoining's 23 
counties has a public county librai-y. The Wyoming 



Territorial Libraiy was established in Cheyenne in 1871 
It is now called the Wyoming State Library. The most 
important libraries at the Lhiiversity of Wyoming in- 
clude the William Robertson Coe Library, the Robert 
Frost Libraiy of Poetry, and an excellent geological 
libraiy. 

Wyoming has about 25 museums. Most of them fea- 
ture pioneer and Indian relics. Outstanding collections 
include the exhibits at the Wyoming Historical Mu- 
seum in Cheyenne, the Fort Caspar Museum in Cas- 
per, the Fort Bridger Museum in Fort Bridger, and the 
Pioneer Museum in Douglas. 

Other museums have exhibits about particular areas 
or points of interest. For example, the Fort Laramie 
Museum has relics from the days of the old pioneer 
wagon trains. The Colter Bay Museum at Jackson Lake 
features exhibits on Grand Teton National Park. The 
Jackson Hole Museum in Jackson has displays about 
the early days of the area. The National Park Service 
operates the Fur Trade Museiun at Moose, in Jackson 
Hole. The Buffalo Bill Museum in Cody displays pos- 
sessions of the famous htmter and showman, Buffalo 
Bill Cody. Also at Cody is the Whitney Gallery of West- 
ern Art, which features paintings and .sculpture by fa- 
mous western artists. 

The L^niversity of Wyoming Geological Museum has 
fine collections of fossils, minerals, and rocks, and also 
exhibits about prehistoric times. The Creation Museum 
at Como Bluff, near Medicine Bow, displays fossil bones 
of prehistoric animals. 

435 



WYOMING 



A Visitor's Guide 



Wyoming's tourist attractions rank among the most spectacular 
in the nation. Each year almost 5,000,000 persons visit the state. 
Yellowstone and Grand Teton national parks are the chief attrac- 
tions. These parks have beautiful mountain sceneiy and many 
kinds of animals. Wilderness trails challenge the hiker's skill. Thou- 
sands of visitors also come to Wyoming to hunt big game animals 
or to fish in the lakes and streams. In 1904, the Eaton Ranch, near 
Sheridan, became the first dude ranch in the West. 




Lake Solitude, Grand Teton Nationol Park 



Devils Tower National Monument 



PLACES TO VISIT 



Following are brief descriptions of some of Wyoming's 
many interesting places to visit. 

Devils Tower National Monument, in northeastern 
Wyoming, is a spectacular volcanic tower that stands 
865 feet above its base, which is 415 feet high. In 1906, 
President Theodore Roosevelt established Devils Tower 
as the nation's first national monument. 

Fort Laramie National Historic Site, near the town of 
Fort Laramie, was a fur trading center and later a mili- 
tary post. The fort helped protect pioneer wagon trains 
on the Oregon Trail. Some of the original buildings 
have been restored. 

Fossil Fish Cliff, near Kemmerer, has the remains of 
fishes that lived in the water which covered the area 
about 50,000,000 years ago. 

Grand Teton National Park lies in northwestern Wyo- 
ming. The majestic Teton Mountains rise sharply 
from the floor of a beautiful valley called Jackson Hole. 
Several lakes lie along the east side of the mountains. 
Visitors can see many kinds of wild animals, which are 
protected in the park. See Grand Teton National 
Park. 



Hell's Half Acre, near Casper, is a rugged 320-acre 
depression where wind and water have worn the rock 
into unusual gullies, ridges, and towers. The canyon is 
near the Powder River. 

Spirit Mountain Cavern, near Cody, is a huge cave, 
still being explored and developed. 

Wildlife Refuges. Wyoming has four major wildlife 
refuge areas where visitors can watch animals feed and 
play. The largest area is the National Elk Refuge near 
Jackson. Two federal waterfo\vl refuges are in Albany 
County in southern Wyoming. Jackson Hole Wildlife 
Park, near Moran Junction, has both large and small 
animals. 

Wind River Canyon, near Themiopolis, offers mo- 
torists a scenic drive through the Owl Creek Moimtains. 
Cliffs rise 2,000 feet above the river. The canyon walls 
are interesting because of the rock formations exposed 
where the river cut through the mountains. 

Yellov/stone National Park, in northwestern Wyo- 
ming, is the nation's oldest and largest national park. 
The spectacular beauty and unusual attractions of the 
area were recognized by early explorers. Yellowstone be- 





Fort Laramie Ruins Near Fori Laramie 




Lower Falls of the Yellowslene, Yellowslene National Park 



All American Indian Days in Sheridan 



came a national park in 1872, and the earliest tourists 
faced danger from Indians. Major features of the park 
include the world's largest geyser area, towering water- 
falls, hot springs, canyons, excellent fishing, and play- 
ful, but dangerous, bears. See Yellowstone National 
Park. 

National Forests. Nine national forests in Wyoming 
provide timber and serve as recreation areas. Shoshone, 
in northwestern Wyoming, is the largest forest. Other 
forests entirely in Wyoming are Bighorn near Sheridan, 
Bridger near Kemmerer, Medicine Bow near Laramie, 
and Teton near Jackson. Black Hills Forest, near Sun- 
dance, extends into South Dakota. Caribou, near Free- 
dom, lies partly in Utah and Idaho. Targhee, near 
Jackson, covers parts of Wyoming and Idaho. Wyoming 
shares Wasatch Forest, near Evanston, with Utah. For 
the areas and chief features of these forests, see National 
Forest (table). 

State Porks. Wyoming has set aside a number of his- 
toric sites, parks, and recreation areas. For information 
on the state parks and facilities, write to Director, Wyo- 
ming State Parks Commission, Shoshoni, Wyo. 82443. 



ANNUAL EVENTS 



Wyoming's most popular annual event is the Frontier 
Days celebration in Cheyenne, which has been staged 
since 1897. It is held during the last full week in July. 
Other annual events include the following. 

January-April: Cutter (horse-drawn sleigh) races near 
Afton, Jackson, Pinedale, and Thayne Qanuary). 

May-August: Days of '49 in GreybuU (June); Pioneer 
Days in Lander (July 3-4); Rodeos in Buffalo, Cody, 
Sheridan, and other towns (July 4); Jubilee Days in 
Laramie (second week of July); Green River Rendez- 
vous in Pinedale (second Sunday in July); Indian Sun 
Dances in Ethete and Fort Washakie (late July); Fine 
Arts Festival in Jackson Hole (July and August); Raw- 
hide Pageant in Lusk (late July); All-American Indian 
Days in Sheridan (early August); Indian pageant in 
Thermopolis (early August); Wyoming State Fair in 
Douglas (late August or early September). 

September-December: One-Shot Antelope Hunt in 
Lander (early September); Evanston Cowboy Days 
(mid-September); Rodeo in Thermopolis (September); 
Western Square Dance Festival in Laramie (October); 
Wyoming IDay, state-wide (December 10). 

437 



WYOMING 



The Land 



Land Regions. Wyoming lies where the Great Plains 
meet the Rocky Mountains. The Continental Divide 
winds through Wyoming from the northwest corner to 
the south-central edge of the state (see Continental Di- 
vide). Water on the east side of the divide flows to the 
Atlantic Ocean. Water on the west side goes into the 
Pacific Ocean. Wyoming has an average elevation of 
6,700 feet, and is higher than any other state except 
Colorado. Wyoming has three major land regions: 
(1) the Great Plains, (2) the Rocky Mountains, and 
(3) the Intermontane Basins. 

The Great Plains cover the eastern part of the state. 
This region is part of the vast interior plain of North 
America that stretches from Canada to Mexico. In 
Wyoming, short, tough grass covers much of the land 
and provides good grazing for cattle and sheep. Cotton- 
woods and thickets of brush grow along the rivers. 
Little rain falls on the plains, but irrigation has turned 
portions of this region into valuable farmland. 

A portion of the famous Black Hills lies in the north- 
eastern part of the state. About a third of the Black Hills 
area lies in Wyoming, and the rest is in South Dakota. 

The Rocky Mountains sweep across Wyoming in huge 
ranges, most of which extend from north to south. In the 
north, the Bighorn Mountains form the front range of 
the mountain area. The Laramie range stretches north 
from Colorado. Between these two front ranges lies a 
wide plateau. In the 1800's, pioneers traveled westward 
on trails through this area. The Absaroka Range rises 
along the east side of Yellowstone National Park. The 
rugged Wind River Range to the south includes nine 
peaks that tower above 1 3,000 feet. Among them is the 
highest mountain in Wyoming, 13,785-foot Gannett 
Peak. The Granite Mountains extend eastwai-d from 
near the southern tip of the Wind River Range. The 
Gros \'entre, Salt River, Snake River, Teton, and Wyo- 
ming ranges are near the western border. The scenic Te- 
tons rise nearly straight up for more than a mile from the 
Jackson Hole \'alley. Other major ranges include the 
Medicine Bow and Sierra Madre in southern Wyoming. 

There is one special link between the Hat land of the 
plains and the heights of the mountains. It is in south- 



\ 


a: BLACK 


intermontAne 


S HILLS 


ROCKY **S'^sy 


i 


MOUNTAINS '^ 


^! 





INTERMONTANE 


P^ -..J 


BASINS 






-^' 



,r»h fa. 



'-&amp;-, 



INTERMONTANE 
^ BASINS 



GREAT 
PLAINS 



ROCKY MOUNTAINS 
Land Regions of Wyoming 



eastern Wyoming, where a narrow finger of land rises 
gently from the plains to a point high in the Laramie 
Mountains. Along the slope are major rail and high- 
way routes that quickly bring a traveler from the plains 
to the mountains. This finger of land, .sometimes called 
the Gang Plank, is only about a hundred yards wide. 

The Intermontane Basinsinclude several fairly flat areas 
between Wyoming's mountain ranges. The word in- 
termontane means between mountains. The major basins 
include the Bighorn and Powder River basins in the 
north, and the Wind River Basin in cential Wyoming. 
The Green River, Great Divide, and Washakie basins 
are in southwestern Wyoming. 

The basins are mostly treeless areas which get less 
rainfall than the mountains. Short grasses and other low 
plants make most of the basins good areas for grazing 
sheep and catde. The Great Divide Basin is an excep- 
tion. It lies along the Continental Divide, but has no 
drainage of water either to the .Atlantic or the Pacific. 
The divide splits and runs around the 3,000 square miles 
of this basin. The little rain that falls there soaks quickly 
into the diy ground. Part of the Great Divide Basin, and 
the area to the south of it, are .sometimes called the Red 
Desert. A few pronghorns and wild horses feed on the 



Absaroka Range ....B 3 
Absaroka Ridge ... .0 2 

Alkali Creek E 4 

Asoen Mts E 3 

Atlantic Peak D 3 

Bald Knoll (Mtn.) . .D 2 

Bear Lodge Mts B 8 

Bear Mtn E 6 

Bear River Divide .. .E 2 

Beartooth Pass B 3 

Beartooth Range ....A 3 

Belle Fourche R C 7 

Big Horn Basin . . . .B 4 
Big Horn Mts. B 5 

Big Sandy Reservoir D 3 

Bighorn R B 4 

Black Butte B 5 

Boysen Reservoir ....0 4 

Bridger Basin E 2 

Bridger Mts C 4 

Bridger Peak E 5 

Buffalo Bill Reservoir B 3 
Cheyenne R.. 

South Fork C 8 

Chugwater Creek ....E 8 

Clear Creek B 6 

Cloud Peak B 5 

Continental Divide ..D 4 
Cra2y Woman Creek .B 6 
Crow Creek E 8 



Dead Indian Peak . . . B 3 
Devils Tower Nat. 

Mon B 8 

Doubletop Peak C 2 

Downs Mtn C 3 

Electric Peak B 2 

Elk Mtn E 6 

Ferris Mts D 5 

Flaming Gorge Res. .E 3 

Franks Peak C 3 

Freezeout Mts D 6 

Fremont Peak 3 

Gannett Peak (Highest 

Point in Wyoming) .0 3 
Glendo Reservoir . . , -D 7 
Grand Teton (Mtn.) C 2 
Grand Teton Nat. 

Park 2 

Granite Pass B 5 

Granite Peak D 4 

Granite Mountains' .D 5 
Great Divide ttasni ..E 4 

Great Plains B 7 

Green Mts D 5 

Green R E 3 

Green River Basin 

see Bridger Basin 

Grevbull R 8 4 

Gros Ventre Range ..C 2 
Gros Ventre R C 2 



Map Index 

Hams Fork E 2 

Hazelton Peak B 5 

Henrys Fork E 3 

Horse Creek E 8 

Hunt Mtn B 5 

Index Peak B 3 

Jackson Lake C 2 

Keyhole Reservoir ,.B 8 

Lake Mtn E 6 

Lance Creek C 8 

Laramie Basin D 6 

Laramie Mts D 6 

Laramie Peak D 7 

Laramie R. D 7 

Little Missouri R. . . .B 8 
Little Powder R. ...B 7 

Little Snake R E 5 

Lizard Head Peak .0 3 

Lodnepole Creek E 8 

Mather Peak B 5 

Medicine Bow Mts. ..E 6 
Medicine Bow Peak .E 6 

Medicine Bow R D 6 

Missouri Buttes B 8 

Mt. Crosby C 3 

Mt. Isabel D 2 

Mt. McDougal 2 

Mt. Sheridan B 2 

Muddy Cieek E 5 

Needle Mtn B 3 



North Platte R. D (i 

Nowood Creek B 5 

Old Faithful 

Geyser B 2 

Owl Creek C 4 

Owl Creek Mts C 4 

Palisades Reservoir . .C I 
Pathfinder Reservoir .D 6 

Pine Ridge D 8 

Pinnacle Butte C 3 

Pole Mtn E 7 

Powder R B 6 

North Fork s 

Middle Fork C 6 

South Fork 6 

Powder River 

Basin- B fi 

Powder River Pass ..8 5 

Ptarmigan Mtn 8 3 

Pumpkin Buttes . .. ..C 7 
Rattlesnake Range ..D 5 

Rawlins Hills D 5 

Rocky Mts C 2 

Salt River Range .. . .C 2 

Sandy Creek D 3 

Seminoe Reservoir ...E 6 

Shirley Basin' D 6 

Shoshone Basin C 4 

Shoshone Lake B 2 

Shoshone Mts 3 



Shoshone R B 4 

North Fork B 3 

South Fork B 3 

Sierra Madre (Mts.) .E 6 

Snake R 2 

Snake River Range ..0 I 

South Pass D 4 

Sweetwater R D 4 

Teton Mts C 2 

Togwotee Pass C 2 

Tongue R A 6 

Trout Peak B 3 

Tump Range E 2 

Twin Mts E 7 

Wapiti Range B 3 

Washakie Basin* . . E 4 
Washakie Needles , ,C 3 

Wiggins Peak C 3 

Wild Horse Creek . ,B 7 

Wind R C 3 

Wind River Basin . C 3 
Wind River Range . .C 3 

Wyoming Basin E 3 

Wyomtng Peak D 2 

Wyoming Range C 2 

Yellowstone Lake ...82 
Yellowstone Nat. 

Park B 2 

Yellowstone Plateau 8 2 
Yellowstone R B 2 



439 




Lake Marie lies in the Rocky Moun- 
tains of southern Wyoming, 



Farmers Harvest Corn near the Wind River in 
the Intermontcne Basins of centra! Wyoming. 



Ten Sleep Creek rushes through the 
thickly wooded Bighorn Mountains. 




-V 



Large Herds of Elk graze in the meadows and foothills of the 
National Elk Refuge near Jackson. Eoch autumn, thousands of 



these animals migrate from the snow-covered mountains of north- 
western Wyoming to the refuge, where they spend the winter. 



thinly scattered plant growth. Sometimes sheep are 
grazed in the area. 

Rivers and Lakes. Parts of three great river systems 
start in the mountains of Wyoming. These systems are 
the Missouri, the Colorado, and the Columbia. 

The tributaries of the Missouri flow both north and 
east. The Yellowstone, Clarks Fork, Bighorn, Tongue, 
and Powder rivers flow north. The Cheyenne, Niobrara, 
and North Platte rivers flow east. 

The Green River, the major source of the Colorado 
River, rises in the Wind River Mountains and flows 
south across western Wyoming into Utah. The Snake 
River is part of the Columbia River system. It starts in 
the Absaroka mountains south of Yellowstone Park. It 
flows into the park, then turns south. The Snake leaves 
Wyoming through a magnificent canyon that cuts 
through three mountain ranges. The Snake is joined by 
the Salt River, and eventually reaches the Columbia. 
Bear River, in the southwestern corner of Wyoming, 



flows into the Great Salt Lake of Utah. 

Many of the rivers have cut beautiful canyons, 
and some plunge over steep cliffs in spectacular water- 
falls. The most interesting canyons include the Laramie 
River Canyon, the Grand Canyons of the .Snake and 
the Yellowstone, Platte River Canyon, Shoshone River 
Canyon, and the Wind River Canyon. The most dra- 
matic waterfalls are the Upper and Lower falls of the 
Yellowstone River. 

Wyoming has hundreds of clear, cold, mountain 
lakes. Among the largest are Fremont, Jackson, 
Shoshone, and Yellowstone lakes. The major man- 
made lakes include Alcova. Boysen, Buffalo Bill, 
Glendo, Guernsey, Keyhole, Pathfinder, and .Seminoe 
reservoirs. Two new dams outside the state backed up 
water and formed major lakes in Wyoming. Yellowtail 
Dam in Montana created a large lake in northeastern 
Wyoming. Flaming Gorge Dam in Utah backs up 
water of the Green River 30 miles inside Wyoming. 



440 



WYOMING/^/. . 
Climate 



Wyoming has a dry, sunny climate. Winters are cold 
and the summers are waim. The diy air makes the 
climate more comfortable than the temperatures would 
indicate. Differences in altitude create large differences 
in temperature in various parts of the state. At Casper, 
in central Wyoming, the average January temperature 
is 22° F., and the average July temperature is 71° F. 
Near Yellowstone Lake, at a higher elevation, the 
January average is 12° F., and the July average is 59° F. 
In the high mountains, freezing temperatures can occur 
every month of the year. 

The highest temperature recorded in Wyoming was 
1 14° F. at Basin on July 12, 1900. Moran reported the 
state's lowest temperature, —63° F., on Feb. 9, 1933. 



The average annual precipitation (rain, melted snow, 
and other foiTns of moisture) ranges from about 5 inches 
at Hyattville in the Bighorn Basin to aboiU 50 inches 
at several points in the Yellowstone Pai'k area. Snow- 
fall varies from 15 to 20 inches in the Bighorn Basin 
to about 260 inches in the northwestern mountains 
of Wyoming. 

On the Great Plains, and in some open areas of 
southern Wyoming", the wind blows during the after- 
noons, usually from the west or southwest. If diy snow 
is on the ground, the wind may whip it into a ground 
blizzard. A person cannot see straight ahead in the 
swirling snow, even though the sky may be blue and 
the sun shining. 



AVERAGE OF DAILY 

LOW TEMPERATURES 

Degrees Degrees 

Centigrade Fahrenheit 

■1810-U jHIc'"' 
•22 to -18 Py^ -8 to 

■27 to -22 i^K -16 to 8 



SEASONAL TEMPERATURES 
JANUARY 




jgi^enne 




AVERAGE OF DAILY 
HIGH TEMPERATURES 


Degrees 
Fahrenheit 


C 


Degrees 
entigrode 


40 to 48 1 


■ 


5 to 9 


32 to 40 1 


H 


0to5 


24 to 32 1 


^ 


-5toO 


16 to 24 




-9 to -5 



AVERAGE OF DAILY 
LOW TEMPERATURES 



Degrees 

Centigrade 

II to 16 

7 to 11 

2 to 7 

-2 to 2 



1 


Degrees J 
Fahrenheit 
52 to 60 i 
44 to 52 
36 to 44 
28 to 36 

1 




JULY 




AVERAGE YEARLY RAINFALL 

(INCLUDES MELTED SNOV\/) 



t 



\^^;..^ 



CD 



AVERAGE OF DAILY 
HIGH TEMPERATURES 

Degrees 
Centigrade 

to 96 ^^^31 to 

to 88 ^^B 27 to 31 

72 to 80 IIIH 22 to 

64 to 72 V^ 18 to 22 



Degrees t 

Fahrenheit Ce 

88 10 96 ^^|3 

SO to 88 ^^B : 

72 to 80 imH 7 

H tn 75 I.. ..^ I 



I n I' I ' ' 1 r 

too 200 300 Kilometers 



Inches 


Centimeters 


32 10 48 WM 


loito 122 


16 10 32 m 


1 41 to 81 


8 10 16 j3&amp;? 


■f^ 20 to 41 


lo8 


to 20 



WORLD BOOK maps 



CHEYENNE 


MONTHLY WEATHER 

JAN FEB MAR APR MAY 
37 40 44 54 63 
14 16 20 29 37 


IN CHEYENNE 

JUNE JULY AUG 
74 83 81 
47 54 53 


AND SHERIDAN 

SEPT OCT NOV DEC 
72 60 47 40 
43 33 23 1/ 


Average of: 

High Temperatures 

Low Temperatures 


7 


6 


9 


10 


13 


11 


11 


10 


7 


6 


6 


5 


Doys of Rain or Snow 


SHERIDAN 


8 


9 


12 


11 


13 


11 


7 


7 


8 


7 


8 


8 


Doys of Rain or Snow 


33 

7 


36 
11 


43 56 
20 31 

Tempera 


66 75 
40 48 

ures are given 


86 84 73 
55 53 43 

in degrees Fahrenheit 


61 
32 


46 
21 


37 
12 


Hi^h Temperolures 
Low Temperotures 



Source: U.S. Weather Bureau 



440a 



WYOMING 



Economy 



Wyoming's economy depends almost entirely on its 
land. The land provides the state's most important 
product — petroleum. In addition, it provides grazing 
for countless cattle and sheep. Even Wyoming's manu- 
facturing plants depend on the land. They process the 
products of mines, farms, and forests. Millions of 
tourists come to Wyoming to see the beauty of the 
landscape. 

The federal government owns almost half the land in 
Wyoming. The govemment has an especially impor- 
tant part in Wyoming's economy because it controls 
grazing, logging, and mining on this huge area. The 
area includes national forests and parks, Indian lands, 
and other public lands. 

Natural Resources. Wyoming's most important 
natural resources are mineral deposits, grazing land, 
scenery, and water. 

Soil. Wyoming does not have large areas of fertile 
soil. Much of the state has sandy soil formed from sand- 
stone rock that lies beneath the surface. The most 
fertile soils of Wyoming are those deposited in the major 
river valleys by floodwaters. Wind-blown dirt called 
loess also has formed fertile soil in some areas. 

Minerals. Wyoming's reserves of bentonite, coal, 
petroleum, trona, and uranium rank among the nation's 
largest. The mineral reserves are found mosdy in the 
basin areas of the state. 

Experts estimate that Wyoming's petioleum reserves 
total about 1 ,300,000,000 barrels. Natural gas occurs in 
many of the oil fields. About 40 per cent of the state has 
coal under it. Trona is found in the southwestern por- 
tion of the state. The largest uranium deposits are in the 
Powder River, Shirley, and Wind River basins. Ben- 
tonite is a type of clay used in oil drilling and in found- 
ries. The largest bentonite reserves are in the northeast 
and north-central sections. 

Major deposits of iron ore lie in several locations in 
the southern half of Wyoming. The western mountains 
contain quantities of phosphate rock. The southwestern 
part of Wyoming has a major deposit of oil shale, a 
potential source of petroleum. Wyoming also has gem- 
stones, particularly agate and jade. Other mineral re- 
sources include building stone, gypsum, limestone, 
pumice, sulfur, vanadium, and vermiculite. 

Forests cover about 10,500,000 acres, or more than 
a sixth of Wyoming's land. Most of the forests grow in 
the mountain areas. Only about a third of the forests are 
available for commercial use. About 2,000,000 acres 
have been set aside in parks and other resei-ves. The 
rest of the forests are either too poor in quality or too 
far from transportation to be cut profitably. The federal 
government controls about 90 per cent of the com- 
mercial forest land. 

The principal commercial trees are evergreens, in- 
cluding firs, pines, and spruces. Quaking aspens grow- 
along the edges of the evergreen forests. 

Plain Life. Bluegrass, wheat grass, tufted fescues, and 
redtops grow on much of the state's 52,000,000 acres of 
grazing lands. Various kinds of cactus and sagebrush 
are found in the drier regions. Areas with poor soil 
produce greasewood brush, which campers and herders 
use as firewood. Mountain wild flowers include the 

440b 



PRODUCTION IN WYOMING 

Total yearly value of goodi produced — $740,107,000 



AGRICULTURAL 
MINERAL B||||||i|||i III! mill I 24% 

PRODUCTS 64% ism^^^^ 




FISH &amp; 
■— MANUFACTURED 
PRODUCTS 10% 



Note: Manufacturing percentage based on value added by manufacture. 
Other percentages based on value of production. Fish Products 
are less than 1 per cent. 

Source: Latest available U.S. Government statistics 



EMPLOYMENT IN WYOMING 

Average yearly number of persons employed- 



126,300 







Number of 
Employees 


Government 


\ ^\V)ikk 


24,100 


Wholesale &amp; Retail Trade 


)^)^)^\)^^^ 


22,«00 


Agriculture 


* » * * H 


19,000 


Services 


***** 


16,800 


Construction 


* * * * 


13,700 


Transportation &amp; Public Utilities 


* * * 1 


11,200 


Mining 


**i 


8,400 


Manufacturing 


* * i 


7,400 


Finance, Insurance &amp; Real Estote 


* 


3,100 



Source: Employment statistics supplied by employers to govemment 
agencies 



arnica, buttercup, evening star, five-finger, flax, forget 
me-not, goldenrod, saxifrage, sour dock, and wind 
flower. 

Animal Life. The forests of Wyoming shelter many 
kinds of wild animals. The most common larger animals 
include black bears, elk, and mule deer. Moose are 
common in the northwestern forests, and mountain 
sheep live among the rocky peaks of the higher moun- 
tains. Grizzly bears, lynxes, and mountain lions are 
seen occasionally. Smaller fur-bearing animals include 
beavers, martens, raccoons, and otters. 

Pronghorns, an American antelope, are common in 
the open areas of the basins. Other animals in the basin 
areas include badgers, cottontail and jack rabbits, coy- 
otes, foxes, skunks, and wildcats. Hunters seek such 
game birds as ducks, geese, grouse, pheasants, sage 
hens, and wild turkeys. Wyoming also is the home of 
bald and golden eagles. The bald eagle builds its nest 
in tall pines near mountain streams or lakes. The golden 
eagle usually chooses a home farther from water. 

Mining accounts for about $485,800,000, or almost 
two-thirds of the annual value of all goods produced in 
Wyoming. 

Petroleum is by far the most important mineral prod- 
uct. It provides more than 70 per cent of the mineral 
value. Wyoming's annual petroleum production in the 
mid-1960"s was about 145,000,000 barrels, worth about 



WYOMING 



FARM, MINERAL, AND 
FOREST PRODUCTS 

This map shows where the leading farm, 
mineral, and forest products are produced. 
The major urban areas (shown in red) 
are the important manufacturing centers. 



75 100 Miles 

4- 



100 150 Kilometers 

WORLD BOOK m«p 



tiw; 



Oil 

o 



Beani \T , _ 

* X V Cool 



Coo Dairy Si V 



Q 

Diir'y m V Clay 

Products*]! ^°'"^^ 

Barley ^Wp E^^^ 

Beef Cattle Forest 
^ //ii„li Prodocts 



Polatoes(^p^^l Oil IfN^urol Gas ^"""'' _^ Beef Cattle Forest 

■tn i¥ ,r*-t::f.i.?i: I 

•Ki Qjl V " u fL.^^^\ I J fins _. 

Sugar Natut 



Hay 



Natural Gos 



Sugar Notufol Gas 
Beets j — 9 

Sheep 



Sheep 



Sond and f— jNolo 

Gravel W "^^^ Sheep — ^ 



fe 



Natural HV 

Gas "nr 

Beef Cattle 

Oil q ^ 



Clay 



Barley 

Phoiphc. 
Rock 



- Dairy M X • Cool sheep Oil m 

o^S^'iS W H"ey Oil VV s"d and H Beef Cottle 

Products^ B.^'lTattl. Q Q Sheep Gravel sj^^, 

11 (b, » IroVoreipoSsloest;-" 

v' 1" ^ Oil Ml* ...f ^y^ 



sUpI ' v^-' "-yt^ns|Bo'rley 

g pBeefCoH^ f P'try^""". Q 



'°°'lil„^ ^5"r^4rQ, ai rf i \;;r°':HwhJa,«rf 

Hoy fjNoturol Coal Q p, Beef Conk K p^, Stor,.^ FT 

^"&gt;"°°°' Urj;;f„n, c^l PataS?.sBa)le,Cheyenne c'oHl. 



$360,000,000. The second most important mineral, 
natural gas, was valued at $29,000,000 a year. Oil and 
gas come from more than 7,000 wells in 20 of the state's 
23 counties. Big Horn, Fremont, Hot Springs, Natrona, 
and Park counties are the top oil producers. Leading 
gas-producing counties are Fremont, Park, Sublette, 
Sweetwater, and Washakie. 

Uranium ore, Wyoming's third most valuable min- 
eral product, has a value of about $27,000,000 a year. 
The main producing areas are east of Riverton, in the 
Pumpkin Buttes area of the Powder River Basin, and in 
the Shirley Basin. Next in value is trona, a white mine- 
ral containing sodium carbonate. It is used in making 
glass and detergents. Mines in Fremont and Platte 
counties produce iron ore. 

A special clay called bentonitc is another major min- 
eral product of Wyoming. Bentonite swells to several 
times its normal size when wet, and is used in oil-well 
drilling. Other important mineral products, in order of 
value, include natural gas liquids such as butane and 
propane, and coal, sand and gravel, limestone, building 
stone, phosphate rock, and vanadium. 

Agriculture provides products worth about $177,- 
800,000 a year. Wyoming has 9,600 farms. They average 
about 3,700 acres in size. 

Ranching is by far the most important agricultural 
activity in Wyoming. Of every $10 of income from 
farm products, about $8.30 comes from livestock and 
livestock products. Beef cattle provide about $6, sheep 
about $1.10, and wool about 60 cents. Dairy cattle, 
hogs, and poultry produce the rest of the income from 
livestock. Wyoming ranks second only to Texas in the 
production of sheep and wool. More than 80 per cent 
of Wyoming's land area is used to graze vast herds of 
cattle and sheep. This total includes millions of acres of 
U.S. land leased to ranchers. 

Wyoming's field crops provide about $1.70 of every 
$10 of farm income. The most valuable crops are grown 
on about 1,470,000 acres of irrigated land. The leading 



crops include beans, potatoes, and sugar beets. Certi- 
fied seed potatoes, which must be unusually free of 
disease, are raised in Goshen and Laramie counties. 
Hay is grown chiefly as feed for livestock. Little of the 
hay is marketed. 

Farmers use dry farming methods on the Great 
Plains (see Dry Farming), The most important crops 
raised on these farms include hay, and wheat and other 
small grains. 

Manufacturing, including processing, accounts for 
only about a tenth of the value of goods produced in 
Wyoming. Goods manufactured in the state have a 
value added by manufacture of about $76,500,000 a year. 
This figure represents the value created in a product by 
Wyoming's industries, not counting such costs as mate- 
rials, supplies, and fuel. 

Petroleum refining accounts for more than half the 
value added, and is Wyoming's most important manu- 
facturing industry. Casper leads in petroleum refining 
and has three refineries. Others are in Cheyenne, Cody, 
Newcastle, Sinclair, and Thermopolis. However, about 
two-thirds of Wyoming's crude oil is shipped to other 
states for refining. The state has 22 plants which process 
natural gas. Five refineries produce sulfur as a by- 
product of gas processing. 

Other plants also process Wyoming mineral products. 
Four uranium mills in Fremont County process the ores 
of mines in the Gas Hills. Another mill operates in the 
Shirley Basin. Near Green River, two plants refine 
trona from nearby mines. One plant uses trona to make 
chemicals for detergents. Plants that produce pellets of 
iron from ore are in Atlantic City and Sunrise. In 1965, 
a nitrogen fertilizer plant began operating in Cheyenne. 
Cement is manufactured in Laramie. Nine plants proc- 
ess bentonite clay. A plant near LovcU produces gypsum 
wallboard. 

Plants in Lovell, Torrington, and Worland refine 
sugar from sugar beets. Other food processing industries 
include flour milling and cheese making. 



440c 



WYOMING 



Wyoming's 62 sa\vmills and other wood processing 
plants handle logs from the state's forests. Sawmills in 
Wyoming cut more than 100,000,000 board feet of lum- 
ber a year. Railroad ties are one of the most important 
products of these mills. About 500,000 ties ai-e produced 
yearly. 

Electric Power. Water power generates about two- 
fifths of Wyoming's electricity. The largest hydroelec- 
tric plants are at Alcova, Seminoe, Kortes, and Boysen 
dams. Coal-burning power plants operate at Casper, 
Glenrock, and Kemmerer. The Glenrock and Kem- 
merer plants were greatly enlarged during the mid- 
1960's. Two new dams also increased the hydroelectric 
production. For Wyoming's kilowatt-hour production, 
see Electric Power (table). 



Transportation. Wyoming has about 61,000 miles of 
roads and highways. About a fifth of them are paved. 
The state also has about 70 airports. Casper and Chey- 
enne have the busiest commercial airports. Wyoming's 
first railroad was the Union Pacific. It was built across 
the territory in 1867 and 1868. Today, the state has 
about 2,445 miles of track. 

Communication. The first newspaper in Wyoming 
was the Daily Telegraph, published at Fort Bridger in 
1863. Today, Wyoming has more than 40 newspapers, 
including 10 dailies. Newspapers with the largest circu- 
lations include the Casper Tribune &amp; Star, the Casper 
Star, and the Jlyorning State Tribune and H'yoming 
Eagle, both of Cheyenne. The state's first radio station, 
KDFN (now KTWO), began broadcasting at Casper 
in 1930. The first television station was KFBC-TV in 
Cheyenne, which started operating in 1954. Today, the 
state has about 30 radio stations and 3 TV stations. 



WYOMING 



History 



Indian Days. The first people who lived in the Wyo- 
ming area were Indian hunters of at least 1 1,000 years 
ago. Later, huge herds of bulTaloes roamed the prairies. 
This rich source of meat attracted many Indians to the 
area. When white men arrived they found Arapaho, 
Bannock, Blackfoot, Cheyenne, Crow, Flathead, Nez 
Perce, Shoshoni, Sioux, and Ute Indians living in what 
is now Wyoming. 

Exploration. French trappers may have entered the 
Wyoming region in the mid-1 700's. However, explo- 
ration of the area did not begin until after 1800. The 
United States bought most of the region from France 
in 1803, as part of the Louisiana Purchase. After that, 
American trappers came to the area to find furs. In 
1807, a trapper named John Colter became the first 
white man to discover the geysers and hot springs of the 
Yellowstone area. Five years later, in 1812, a party of 
fur traders from Oregon crossed the area from west to 
east. The group, led by Robert Stuart, discovered a 
relatively easy way across the mountains through South 
Pass. This route became important in pioneer travel to 
the West. 

During the 1820's and 1830's, the fur trade became 
more highly organized. General William Ashley estab- 
lished an annual rendezvous (gathering) of trappers. At 
these gatherings, his company traded ammunition, food, 
and other supplies for furs. The first rendezvous took 
place in 1824 on the Green River, near the present 
Wyoming-Utah border. The yearly rendezvous became 
important to the trappers not only for trading, but for 
exchange of news and as a social event. 

A trapping and trading party of more than a hun- 
dred men came to the Wyoming area in 1832. The 
group was led by Captain Benjamin L. E. de Bonne- 
ville. Bonneville's party discovered an oil spring in 1833 
in the Wind River Basin. In 1834, traders William Sub- 
lette and Robert Campbell established Fort William in 
what is now eastern Wyoming. This fort, later called 
Fort Laiamie, was the area's first permanent trading 
post. Jim Bridger, one of the great western trappers and 
scouts, founded Fort Bridger in southwestern Wyoming 

44od 



IMPORTANT DATES IN WYOMING 



1807 John Colter explored the Yellowstone area. 
1812 Robert Stuart discovered South Pass across the Rocky 
Mountains. 

1833 Captain Benjamin L. E. de Bonneville mapped the area 
and discovered oil east of the Wind River Mountains. 

1834 William Sublette and Robert Campbell established Fort 
William (later Fort taramie). 

1843 Scout Jim Bridger established Fort Bridger. 

1867 The Union Pacific Railroad entered Wyoming. 

1868 Congress created the Territory of Wyoming. 

1869 The Wyoming territorial legislature gave women the right 
to vote and hold elective office. 

1872 Yellowstone became the first national park. 

1883 Wyoming's first oil well was drilled in the Dallas Field, 
near Lander. 

1890 Wyoming became the 44th state on July 10. 

1892 The Johnson County War broke out after o dispute over 
cattle rustling. 

1906 President Theodore Roosevelt made Devils Tower the 
first notional monument. 

1910 Engineers completed Shoshone (now Buffalo Bill) Dam. 

1925 Nellie Tayloe Ross became the first woman governor in 
the United States. 

1929 Grand Teton became a national park. 

1938-1939 Engineers completed Alcova and Seminoe dams. 

1951-1952 Major uranium deposits were found in several 
ports of Wyoming. 

1956 Congress approved the Upper Colorado River Project 
to make better use of the area's water and to produce 
electric power for Wyoming and six other states. 

1960 The United States' first operational intercontinental bal- 
listic missile base opened near Cheyenne. 

1962 Iron mining revived the ghost town of Atlantic City. 

1965 Minuteman missile sites were completed near Cheyenne. 

in 1843. After trading posts were established, the rendez- 
vous became less important. The last of these colorful 
gatherings was held in 1840. 

In 1842 and 1843, Lieutenant John C. Fremont ex- 
plored the Wind River Mountains. His parly was 




HISTORIC 
WYOMING 



The First National Park. 

Trapper John Colter discovered 
Yellowstone in 1 807. It was 
made a national park in 1872. 



Johnson County Cattle War 

of 1 892 involved ranctiers and 
rustlers who battled each other 
for control of the cattle ranges. 




First National Monument. 

Devils Tower, 865 feet high, in 
the Block Hills region, became 
a notional monument in 1 906. 




Fur Trade began in 1806, 
when trapper John Colter found 
rich pelts in the Wyoming area. 





'oti Bridget 



Feminine Firsts In Wyoming. Women won 
the right to vote in 1 869. In 1 870, Esther H. 
Morris became the first woman justice of the 
peace in the United Stotes. In 1925, Nellie 
Tayloe Ross became the first woman governor. 



Petroleum was discovered in 
the Wind River Bosin in 1 833 by 
Captoin Benjamin de Bonneville. 
It was first used as axle grease. 

Fort loiomie • 





•*|fc* 



#^*^»ii5? 



*!►.„ 



Fort Laramie and Fort Bridger offered pro- 
tection from Indians in Wyoming. Thousands 
of travelers crossed the stole in covered wag- 
ons on overland trails behveen 1 840 and I 870. 



The Treaty of Fort Laramie 

brought peace with the Sioux in 
1 868, when they agreed to give 
up their londs. Father De Smet, a 
missionary, orronged the treaty. 



WYOMING 



guided by the famous scout Kit Carson. After Fremont 
made his report. Congress voted in 1 846 to establish forts 
along the Oregon Trail to protect settlers moving west. 
In 1849, the government bought Fort William. This 
fort, also known as Fort John, was renamed Fort 
Laramie by the army. 

At various times, parts of what is now Wyoming were 
part of the territories of Louisiana, Missouri, Nebraska, 
Oregon, Washington, Idaho, and Dakota. Part of 
southern Wyoming, south of the 42nd parallel, be- 
longed to Spain from the 1500's to the 1800's. Mexico 
owned it in the early 1800's, but lost it to the Republic 
of Texas in 1836. This area became part of the United 
States in 1845 when Texas joined the LTnion. 

The Great Trails. By 1850, pioneers were streaming 
west through the Wyoming area on three famous trails. 
These were the California Trail, the Mormon Trail to 
Utah, and the Oregon Trail to the Pacific Northwest. 
All three trails took South Pass through the mountains. 
Beyond the pass, the Oregon Trail turned northwest, 
and the Mormon and California trails went southwest. 
Thousands of settlers traveled through Wyoming, but 
few of them stayed. 

The Plains Indians watched this stream of settlers 
with growing alarm. The white man killed or frightened 
away the game. His carelessness with fire caused roaring 
blazes on the prairie, and his diseases killed or crippled 
countless Indians. The angry warriors began to attack 
the wagons. 

Indian Troubles. The Plains Indians were expert 
horsemen and brave fighters. They raided the wagon 
trains, and fought the soldiers sent to protect the 
wagons. In one fight near Fort Laramie in 1854, Lieu- 
tenant John Grattan and 29 troopers were killed. 

Gold was discovered in Montana in the 1860's, and 
settlers began moving north up the Bozeman Trail to 
Montana. This trail crossed a different area of the 
Indian land, and the tribes fought with new fury. 

To keep the Bozeman Trail open, the army built 
Fort Phil Kearny near the Bighorn Mountains in the 
summer of 1866. The Sioux hated this fort. Led by Red 
Cloud, they put war parties around it in what was 
called the Circle of Death. Dining the first six months, 
about 150 men were killed. Captain W. J. Fetterman 
and 81 of his men died in a single battle. Finally, in 
1868, a treaty was signed at Fort Laramie. The army 
agreed to give up the fort and leave northeastern Wyo- 
ming to the Indians. In return, the Indians agreed not 
to interfere with the construction of the Union Pacific 
Railroad through southern Wyoming. Red Cloud re- 
fused to sign the treaty, but other chiefs did so. 

A troubled peace lasted until 1874, when prospectors 
discovered gold in the Black Hills. Thousands of white 
men violated the treaty by moving into the area. The 
Sioux considered the Black Hills sacred, and fought the 
new invasion. Sioux and Cheyenne warriors won two 
bitter battles with U.S. soldiers in what is now Mon- 
tana. However, the Indian force broke up to flee from 
other troops. Some Indians went to Canada, and others 
agreed to move to reservations. Serious Indian fighting 
ended in the summer of 1876, and Wyoming settlers 
finally had peace. 

44of 




Territorial Progress. Even before the Indian troubles 
ended, southern Wyoming was developing rajjidly. The 
Lhiion Pacific Railroad entered the area in 1867. 
Towns were founded as the "end of track" moved west. 
Cheyenne, Laramie, Rawlins, Rock .Springs, Green 
River, and Evanston grew up in turn. Towns also 
appeared along the route of the great trails. In 1868, 
Congress created the Territory of Wyoming. President 
Ulysses S. Grant appointed Brigadier General John A. 
Campbell as the first governor of the territory. 

On Dec. 10, 1869, the territorial legislature granted 
women the right to vote, hold office, and sei"ve on juries. 
The new law was the first of its kind in the LInited 
States. Women first served on juries in 1870, in Laramie. 
That same year, Mrs. Esther H. Morris of South Pass 
City became the nation's first woman justice of the 
peace. 

Ranching supported the new territory's economy. 
Large numbers of longhorn cattle were driven north 
from Texas to Wyoming. Wealthy ranchers controlled 
huge areas of the territory and ruled the affairs of the 
territorial government until 1887. That year, thousands 
of cattle died in the howling blizzards and subzero 
temperatures of a bitterly cold winter. Many ranchers 
were ruined financially, and lost much of their political 
power. 

The foundations of Wyoming's minerals industry 
were laid long before the area became a territory. In 
1833, the Bonneville party greased its wagon axles at a 
spot %vhere oil seeped from the ground in the Wind 
River Basin. Jim Bridger sold oil at his fort, and pio- 
neers mixed it with flour to use as axle grease. Gold was 
found at South Pass in 1842, but the discovery aroused 
little interest. In 1867, a more promising strike attracted 
many prospectors to the area. Several boom towns, such 
as Atlantic City and South Pass City, sprang up. 

In 1883 and 1884, interest in oil was revived because 
of profitable drilling elsewhere. The first successful well 
was drilled in 1883 in the Dallas Field, near Lander. 
Plans were made for exploration of several areas near 




It 

3i-l 4''''- , - - 











'«■*'' 






.:«-:**i^-' 



Wind River Indian Reservation was presented to the famous 
Chief Washakie in 1 868 by the U.S. government. The Shoshoni re- 
ceived the reservation as a reward for their friendliness to the 



&gt;■ 







Cllll 11 It^i lUl.tn lllbL ILUlIUll IIUIL'.IU (Jl ^Ulli: 1 1 L .1 1 1 I'.ll 1 1 Ui 1 O^iy 

white man and their help in fighting tribes hostile to settlers. W. H. 
Jackson took this picture in 1870. His photographs form a vivid 
record of Wyoming history during the late 1 BOO's. 



Casper. But the industn,- developed slowly, and several 
years passed before oil activity prospered. 

Wyoming's tourist industry also got its start during 
the territorial days. In 1872, Congress created Yellow- 
stone National Park. The nation's first national park 
immediately attracted tourists, even though travel was 
risky because of the Indians. 

Statehood. Wyoming became the 44th state of the 
Union on July 10, 1890. Francis E. Warren, a Republi- 
can, became the first state governor on September 1 1 . 
He resigned in November after being elected to the U.S. 
Senate. 

Settlers flocked to Wyoming, and trouble started 
almost immediately. Many settlers built homes on the 
prairies and tended small herds of cattle. The powerful 
cattlemen who had used the range for years grew angry 
when the settlers started fencing their small ranches. 
Some of the newcomers built their cattle herds by steal- 
ing cattle from the established ranches. 

The Johnson County War. Molence broke out in 
north-central Wyoming in 1892. The established cattle- 
men were convinced that their herds were being looted. 
They had no proof to identify the rustlers, but they had 
strong suspicions. The operators of the large ranches 
prepared a list of suspects and decided to kill the men 



on the list. They brought in 25 gunmen from Texas, 
and made up a force of 55 men. This force, called the 
Invaders, raided the Kaycee Ranch near Buffalo and 
killed two men. 

Information about the killings reached Buffalo, the 
seat of Johnson County, and a group of armed men was 
formed to stop the Invaders. The two forces met on 
the TA Ranch, but federal troops arrived in time to 
prevent a bloody battle. The Invaders were taken to 
Cheyenne for trial. However, important witnesses failed 
to appear at the trial. The Invaders were released, and 
the "war" ended. 

Trouble again broke out on the range in the early 
1900"s. Catdemen and sheepmen argued over grazing 
rights. The catdemen claimed that their animals would 
not feed on land that had been grazed by sheep. A feud 
developed as the number of sheep increased. The climax 
came when catdemen killed three sheepmen near Ten 
Sleep in 1909. But tempers cooled, and sheep became 
an important \Vyoming product. 

Progress as a State. After 1900, Wyoming's popula- 
tion grew rapidly. The Homestead acts of 1909. 1912, 
and 191(j provided free land for settlers under certain 
conditions. The construction of dams along major 
streams brought irrigation water to some areas of the 



1. Francis E. Warren 

2. Amos W. Barber 

3. John E. Osborne 

4. William A. Richards 

5. DeForest Richards 

6. Fenimore Challerton 

7. Bryant B. Brooks 

8. Joseph M. Carey 

9. John B. Kendrick 
10. Frank I. Houx 

1 1. Robert D. Carey 

12. William B. Ross 

13. Frank E. Lucas 



Party 


Term 


J \^r 


f» ■ vyinMii\7 


Party 


Term 


Republican 


1890 


14. 


Nellie Toyloe Ross 


Democratic 


1925-1927 


Republican 


1890-1893 


15. 


Frank C. Emerson 


Republican 


1927-1931 


Democratic 


1893-1895 


16. 


Alonzo M. Clark 


Republican 


1931-1933 


Republican 


1895-1899 


17. 


Leslie A. Miller 


Democratic 


1933-1939 


Republican 


1899-1903 


18. 


Nels H. Smith 


Republican 


1939-1943 


Republican 


1903-1905 


19. 


Lester C. Hunt 


Democratic 


1943-1949 


Republican 


1905-191 1 


20. 


Arthur Griswold Crone 


Republican 


1949-1951 


Democratic 


1911-1915 


21. 


Frank A. Barrett 


Republican 


1951-1953 


Democratic 


1915-1917 


22. 


C. J. Rogers 


Republican 


1953-1955 


Democratic 


1917-1919 


23. 


Milward L. Simpson 


Republican 


1955-1959 


Republican 


1919-1923 


24. 


J. J. Hickey 


Democratic 


1959-1961 


Democratic 


1923-1924 


25. 


Jack R. Gage 


Democratic 


1961-1963 


Republican 


1924-1925 


26. 


Clifford P. Hansen 


Republican 


1963- 



441 




Guided Missile Launching Site near Warren Air Force Base 
symbolizes Wyoming's important role in the defense of the United 



The nociiiK C'impnny 

States. During tiie 1 960's, many missiles were installed in under- 
ground silos (storage places) near the base. 



prairie. Crops grown on this land increased the agri- 
cultural wealth of the state. Tourism became more im- 
portant after President Theodore Roosevelt in 1906 
made Devils Tower the first national monument. 

Wyoming's first oil boom came in 1912 in the Salt 
Creek Field north of Casper. Pipelines and refineries 
were built to handle the crude oil. By 1918, Casper 
had become a bustling center of business and finance. 

In 1924, Wyoming voters elected the United States' 
first woman governor, Mrs. Nellie Tayloe Ross. In 1933, 
Mrs. Ross became the first woman director of the U.S. 
Mint. 

\Vyoming suffered less than most of the other states 
during the Great Depression of the I930's. The state's 
economy was helped by increasing oil production, and 
by various government construction projects. These in- 
cluded the Kendrick Project, which provided both 
irrigation \vater and new hydroelectric capacity. The 
project, on the North Platte River, included Alcova, 
Korles. and Seminoe dams. 

The 1940's and 1950's. Wyoming's economy 
boomed during World War II (1939-1945). The war 
brought great demands for coal, lumber, meat, and oil. 
The economic development continued after the war 
ended. Tourism increased. Two minerals — trona and 
uranium — sparked new industrial development. The 
key ingredient in trona is sodium carbonate, which has 
many uses in the chemical industiy. 

Oil drilling in southwestern Wyoming had shown 
that trona lay several hundred feet beneath the surface 
in the Green River Basin. In 1947, a mine shaft was 
sunk there and production of trona started. The output 
increased rapidly during the 1950's. 

The first major uranium discovery in Wyoming was 
made in 1951 by a scientist of the U.S. Geological 
Suivey. He found large deposits in the Pumpkin Buttes 



area of the Powder River Basin. This discoveiy proved 
that large uranium deposits could occur far from areas of 
volcanic rock. All previously known deposits were 
thought to be associated with volcanic rock areas. After 
the findings were published in eaily 1952, uranium 
was found in many of Wyoming's major basins. By the 
end of the 1 950's, Wyoming ranked third in the United 
States in known uranium resei-ves. 

Wyoming Today faces the problems of a large state 
with a small population. It has no major population 
centers to provide large markets for manufactured 
goods. Products made in the state must be shipped long 
distances. Wyoming's business and political leaders 
have attempted to attract new manufacturing indus- 
tries, but these efforts have been only partly successful. 

Wyoming's vast store of resources ofl'ers prospects for 
continued growth. Many companies expanded their 
Wyoming operations during the 1960's. One steel com- 
pany built a new iron ore processing plant near .Sunrise. 
Another firm revived the old ghost town of Atlantic 
City by opening an iron mine and building a processing 
plant there. Trona operations near Green River con- 
tinued to grow. Two elecU-ic power companies have 
spent large sums to build generating plants that use 
Wyoming's huge coal deposits as fuel. These plants, at 
Glenrock and Kemmerer, provide power for parts of 
Wyoming, and also for areas oiUside the state. 

Oil exploration continued in the mid-19r)0's. The 
greatest activity took place in the Powder River Basin. 
Coal production, which had dropped during the 1950's, 
rose again in 1959. New power plants promised a steady 
market for coal. 

Many research activities also hold promise for Wyo 
ming. A group of oil companies combined in the mid- 
1960's to experiment with production of oil from oil 
shale. Several firms conducted experiments with Wyo- 



442 



ming coal to test the coal's value as a source of coke. 
Many scientists believe the Green River Basin covild 
become a center of activity for the chemical industry. 
The basin has large resei'ves of coal, gas, oil, oil shale, 
potash, trona, and other resources. The area already is 
served by well developed transportation systems. Utah's 
huge Flaming Gorge Dam created a lake on the Green 
River in Wyoming. Water and hydroelectric power from 
this dam added to the appeal of the Green River Basin 
as a site for. industrial development. 



WYOMING 



In 1960, Wyoming became the headquarters of the 
first operational long range missile sqviadron in the 
United States. Francis E. Warren Air Force Base at 
Cheyenne is the control center. In the mid-1 960's, the 
original missiles were replaced by more modern Minute- 
man missiles. 

James M. Flinchum, T. A, Larson, and J. David Love 



WYOMING 



Study Aids 



Related Articles in World Book include: 



Biographies 

Laramie, Jacques 
Morris, Esther H. 
Pollock, Jackson 

Cities 
Casper Cheyenne Laramie 



Ross, Nellie Tayloe 
Washakie 



Sheridan 



History 



Homestead Act 
Indian, American 
Indian Wars 

(Death on the Plains) 



Oregon Trail 
Pony Express 
Trails of Early Days 
Western Frontier Life 



Physical Features 

Bighorn River Great Plains 

Black Hills Powder River 

Devils Tower National Rocky Mountains 

Monument Teton Range 

Gannett Peak Yellowstone National Park 

Grand Teton National Yellowstone River 

Park 

Products 

For Wyoming's rank among the states in production, 
see the following articles: 
Bean Petroleum Sheep Uranium Wool 

Other Related Articles 
Buffalo Bill Dam Rodeo 

Cowboy Warren Air Force Base 

Ranching Wyoming, 

Rocky Mountain States Uni\ersity of 

Outline 
I. Government 

A. Constitution 

B. Executive 

C. Legislature 

D. Courts 
II. People 

III. Education 
.\. .Schools 
B. Libraries and Museums 

IV. A Visitor's Guide 

A. Places to Visit 

B. Annual Events 

V. The Land 

A. Land Regions 

B. Rivers and Lakes 
VI. Climate 

VII. Economy 

A. Natural Resources 

B. Mining 

C. Agriculture 

D. Manufacturing 
VIII. History 



E. Local Government 

F. Taxation 

G. Politics 



E. Electric Power 

F. Transportation 

G. Communication 



Questions 

What three famous pioneer routes crossed Wyoming 
in the mid-1800's? 

What part of Wyoming once belonged to the Republic 
of Texas? 

What was the first national park in the United States? 

Why was the construction of the Union Pacific Rail- 
road important to the development of Wyoming cities? 

Why was the result of Wyoming's election for governor 
in 1924 so unusual? 

What is Wyoming's leading mineral product? 

What national monument was the first in the United 
States? 

What provision in the territorial statutes gave Wyo- 
ming the nickname the Equality State? 

Who were the Invaders? 

What was a fur trappers' rendezvous? 

Books for Young Readers 

Burt, Nathaniel. War Cry of the West: The Story oj the 
Powder River. 1st ed. Holt, Rinehart &amp; Winston, 1964. 

Farnsworth, Frances J. Winged Moccasins: The Storv of 
Sacajawea. Messner, 1954. 

Garst, Doris S. Jim Bridger, Greatest oJ the Mountain Men. 
Houghton, 1952. A fictional biography of the fur 
trader and scout. 

Richardson, Myra R. Sheep Wagon Family. Dodd, 1954. 
A story about the struggles of a family homesteading 
in the Wyoming Territory. 

Whittenburg, Clarice. Wyoming's People. Old West Pub- 
lishing Co., Denver, Colo., 1958. A history of Wyo- 
ming from its earliest days to the present time. 

Books for Older Readers 

Bauer, Clyde M. Tellotvstone — Its Underworld: Geology 
and Historical Anecdotes of Our Oldest National Park. Univ. 
of New Mexico Press, 1948. 

Bonney, Orrin H., and Lorraine. Guide to the Wyoming 
Mountains and Wilderness Areas. Sage, 1960. 

Burt, Maxwell S. Powder River. Rinehart, 1938. 

Larson, Taft A. History of Wyoming. Univ. of Nebraska 
Press, 1965. 

Mercer, Asa S. Banditti of the Plains. Univ. of Okla- 
homa Press, 1959. A firsthand account of the Johnson 
County Cattle War. The author describes the invasion 
of Johnson County in .\pril, 1892, by a group of catde- 
men and hired gunmen. 

O'Hara, Mary. Wyoming Summer . Doubleday, 1963. 

Pence, Mary L., and Homsher, Lola. Ghost Towns of 
Wyoming. Hastings, 1956. 

Trachsel, Herman H., and Wade, Ralph M. The 
Government and Administration of Wyoming. Crowell, 
1953. J -&gt; a 

Ureanek, Mae. Wyoming Wonderland. Sage, 1964. 
Vaughn, Jess W. The Battle of Platte Bridge. Univ. of 

Oklahoma Press, 1963. 
Wyoming: A Guide to Its History, Highways and People. Rev. 

ptg. Oxford, 1946. 



443 



WYOMING, UNIVERSITY OF 

WYOMING, UNIVERSITY OF, is a state-controlled 
coeducational school at Laramie, VVyo. It has colleges 
of agriculture, arts and sciences, commerce, education, 
engineering, law, nursing, and pharmacy. It also has a 
graduate school. Army and Air Force RO TC units are 
on the campus. 

The university is noted for its American Studies pro- 
gram. The library has a special collection of books on 
America, in connection with this program. There is 
also an Institute of International Affairs. The school 
has a biological research station at Moran, and si.\ 
agriculttiral substations in the state. 

The university calls its athletic teams Cowboys. Its 
colors are brown and yellow, and "Cowboy Joe" is the 
school song. The University of Wyoming v\'as founded 
in 1887. For enrollment, see Universities and Col- 
leges (table). G. D. Humphrey 

WYOMING VALLEY is a section of northeastern 
Pennsylvania about 3 miles wide and 20 miles long. 
It lies along the north branch of the Susquehanna River 
near W'ilkes-Barre. The Wyoming \'alley has rich 
deposits of anthracite coal. 

The valleN' is a historic gateway to central Pennsyl- 
vania from New England and New York. Many settlers 
entered the valley during colonial days. In the 1 770's, 
it became the center of a boundary controversy be- 
tween Connecticut and Pennsylvania. Congress settled 
the dispute in favor of Pennsylvania. In 1778, the 
Wyoming \'alley was the scene of a bloody massacre 
(see WSoMiNG X'allev Massacre). s. k. Stevens 

WYOMING VALLEY MASSACRE, one of many 
tragedies of the American Revolutionary War, occurred 
in what is now Luzerne County, Pennsylvania. In 1 778, 
it was an incorporated county in the colony of Connect- 
icut. At that time, most of the inhabitants of the valley 
believed in the American cause of independence from 
Great Britain. But some of the residents were Tories, 
and remained loyal to Great Britain. 

As the war went on, the Tories were dri\'en out of 
the community, and joined other Toiy and Indian 
bands. In the summer of 1778, these bands attacked 
Wyoming Valley. The inhabitants fled for safety to 
Forty Fort, near the site of the present city of Wilkes- 
Barre, Pa. About 300 men defended the fort. An army 
of 800 fighters, led by a British officer, opposed them. 
Six hundred of the attackers were Indians. 

On July 3, the two groups met in a hard-fought 
battle. The attackers defeated the settlers, and killed 



more than two-thirds of them. The Indians tortured 
many of them to death. The survivors were left to find 
their way to the nearest settlements, and many of them 
died on the way. The attackers destroyed the village 
and left the valley in ruins. John r. Alden 

WYSS, vees, is the family name of a Swiss clergyman 
and his sons. Together they produced the story The 
Swiss Family Robinson. Johann D.wid Wvss ( 1 743- 18 1 8), 
the father, wrote the story. His son Johann Rudolph 
(1781-1830) edited and published it. Another son, 
Johann Emmanuel (1782-1837), illustrated it. The 
Swiss Family Robinson tells of the adventures of a family 
shipwrecked on a dcsat (uninhabited) island in the 
Pacific Ocean. It is perhaps the best of the many stories 
written in imitation of Daniel Defoe's Robinson Crusoe 
(see Defoe, Daniel). 

The Wyss family liked to read and discuss adventure 
stories such as Robinson Crusoe. They pretended they had 
been shipwrecked on a desert island, and told each 
other tales of their imaginary' life there. Johann David 
wrote down these tales as the family told them, and his 
son Johann Emmanuel illustrated them with drawings 
and water colors. Some years later, Johann Rudolph 
edited the stories. He published them in Switzerland in 
1812 and 1813 as The Swiss Robinson. The book has 
been translated from German into many languages, 
including the English version The Siciss Family Robin- 
son (1813). Johann Rudolph Wyss also wrote "My 
Counuy Calls," a national song of Switzerland. 

WYTHE, zvM, GEORGE (1726-1806), an American 
statesman, was a signer of the Declaration of Inde- 
pendence. He was also a well-known lawyer and judge, 
and a patron of Thomas Jefferson and other distin- 
guished \'irginians (see Jefferson, Thomas [Educa- 
tion]). He wrote the original \"irginia protest against the 
Stamp Act in 1 764. It was so fiery that it had to be re- 
written in a softer tone. He participated in the Con- 
stitutional Convention of 1787. 

Wythe served in the Second Continental Congress in 
1775 and 1776. Later he helped draft the Virginia con- 
stitution. He became a judge of the court of chancery of 
\"irginia in 1778, and, in 1786, he became chancellor 
of the state. 

Wythe was born at Back River, Va., and attended the 
College of William and Mary. He was admitted to the 
bar in 1 757, and entered the \'irginia House of Bur- 
gesses a year later. In 1779, Wythe was appointed to 
the nation's first law professorship. The professorship 
was established that year at William and Mary by 
Thomas Jefferson. clarence l. v'er Steeo 



444 



T H 



^^f o 



D 



o 



V 

jr ^^^ '5 ^^^ -4'^ letter of our alphabet. 

^^L J^ It came from a letter used by the 

M m ^ ^^ Semites, who once lived in Syria 
and Palestine. They named it samehh, their word ior fish, 
and adapted an Egyptian hieroglyphic, or picture symbol, 
used to represent fish. The Greeks later took the symbol 
into their alphabet, and used it to represent the soimd of 
ch. The Romans used the letter to represent the same 
sound, but changed its shape slightly. See Alphabet. 

Uses. -Y or .v is about the 23rd most frequently used 
letter in books, newspapers, and other printed material 
in English. X, used alone or in combination with other 
letters, often stands for the word Christ, as in Xmas. X is 
the Roman numeral for tert. X is used in physical science 
and in mathematics to denote an unknown quantity, 
or a quantity that was at first unknown, as in .V ray. In 
arithmetic problems, .\ is the sign of multiplication. In 
describing measurements, .v represents the word by, as 
in^'.v /-'', or nine by twelve feet. 

Pronunciation. In English, .v has six sounds: ks, as in 
six; gz, as in e.xathine; hh, as in lu-xury; gzh, as in luxurious; 
sh, as in anxious; and z, as in xylophone. In some cases, 
such as luxury, the x is not voiced. In luxurious, the x 
is voiced. 

In Spanish, a may be pronounced as the English s or 
as the English h. In most of the other European lan- 
guages, X has the same sounds as it has in English. See 
Pronunciation. i. j. gelb and j. m. wells 



::r? &lt;r~;":^t.7^;i 




The 24fh lefter took its shape from an ancient Semitic 
symbol, samekh, a word that meant fish. The Greeks 
gave it a hard ch sound like one used in German today. 



X 



The Romans, about A.D. 1 14, 
gave the letter its capital form. 



X 



The Greeks, about 600 
B.C., colled their letter cbi. 



AUaniic Ocean 



ROME # GREECE 



Mediferroneon Sea 



PHOENICIA 



f 



The Smalt Letter x developed from 
Romon writing obout A.D. 800. It was 
a smaller form of the capital. By the 
1500's, it had the form we use todoy. 



J&gt;c 



A.D. 800 



TODAY 




EGYPT •! 



t SINAI 



&gt;/ 



Ca 



The Egyptians, about 3000 B.C., 
drev/ this symbol of a fish. 



^s^&gt; 







The Phoenicians/ about 1000 
B.C., developed their own symbol. 



C5 



The Semites, about 1 500 
B.C., simplified the Egyptian 
fish, calling their letter samekh. 



445 




X Ray on a Hobby Horse, above, is great fun to youngsters at Walter 
Reed Army Hospital, in Washington, D.C. The speciolly-constructed horse 
wos designed as an aid in taking X rays of children. An X-ray photograph 
of a wrist, left, reveals the shodov^ pattern of the bones. 



446 



X RAYS. The discovery of X rays was one of the most 
important events in modern physics, because of the in- 
formation these rays supply concerning the nature and 
properties of matter, and their effects upon living tissue. 
The rays cannot be seen, but they can penetrate the 
human body, heavy metal castings, or the latticework 
of atoms inside solids. They leave a record upon a photo- 
graphic plate of what these substances are like inter- 
nally. Within the space of only a litde more than fifty 
years, X rays have become invaluable in medicine, in 
industry, and in scientific research. 

X rays were so named by their discoverer, Wilhelm 
Konrad Roentgen, because they were then rays drim- 
knowh or^inT An x is used as a scientific symbol for the 
unknown. Sometimes, X rays are called Roentgen rays, 
in honor of Roentgen's discovery in 1895. In medicine, 
the science of X rays is called roentgenology. 

X rays are part of the electromagnetic spectrum. This 
means that they are related to radio waves, heat or 
infrared rays, visible light waves, ultraviolet and gamma 
rays, and rays which accompany cosmic radiation. 
X rays are among the shortest of all these rays. Only 
the gamma rays (given off by radium and other radio- 
active material) and radiation associated with cosmic 
rays are shorter. Visible light has a wave length of 
5,000 angstrom units, or twenty millionths of an inch. 
The wave length of ordinary X rays is about one 
angstrom unit, or four billionths of an inch. 

How X Rays Are Produced. When die negative termi- 
nal, or cathode, of a vacuum tube is heated by an electric 
current so that it glows white hot, it gives off a stream 
of electrons, or cathode rays, which move toward the 
anode, or positive electrical terminal, of the tube. If these 
electrons strike the anode, which in an X-ray tube is 
called the "target" and is ordinarily of metal, they cause 
the atoms of the target to give off X rays. The target 
in X-ray tubes is frequently made of tungsten, partly 
because that metal is not readily melted by the heat 
resulting from the impact of the electrons upon it. The 
atoms in the target give off X rays when the electrons 
inside the atoms are forced out of their normal positions 
by the energy of the bombarding electrons, and then fall 
back into place. The electrons displaced from their nor- 
mal positions in the process of X-ray production lie very 
close to the center of the atom. It requires more energy 
to move these electrons than to disturb any others 
around the atomic nucleus. The higher the electric 
voltage that is applied to the cathode rays, the shorter 
the wave lengths of the X rays that are given off", and 
die closer these X rays will be to gamma rays. That is 
why in building X-ray machines for some applications, 
scientists and engineers have attempted to develop very 
high-voltage sources and X-ray tubes which will with- 
stand these high voltages. Under such voltages, the 
electrons that strike the target may almost reach the 
speed of light. 

X rays can be divided into two classes. Scientists 
speak of hard X rays, which are those produced by 



X Rays Are Created when an electric current of very high 
voltage detaches electrons from the filament of the electronic 
tube and hurls them against the tungsten plate with great force. 
The metal atoms in the target emit radiations called X rays. 



X RAYS 




This Powerful X-Ray Machine 

use in the treatment of cancer. 



General Electric X-Ray Corp. 

specially constructed for 



A Roentgenologist Examines an X-Ray Film. He ts a physi- 
cian who specializes in diagnosis and treatment of disease by X rays. 






(^Liioral Electric X-Ray Corp. 

One of the Largest X-Ray Machines In use is this two- 
million-volt giant for testing materials in a large factory. 



higher voltages and v\hich are able to penetrate sub- 
stances much more readily than the soft X rays, which 
are created at lower voltages. 

Extremely high-energy X rays can be produced in a 
betatron. This device accelerates electrons to high speeds. 
The electrons whirl round and round inside a doughnut- 
shaped tube. They may reach speeds corresponding to 
300,000,000 electron volts (Mev). When the electrons 
collide with the atoms of the target, they produce X 
rays of high energy. High-energy electrons can also be 
produced in an accelerator called a synchrotron. See 
Betatron; Synchrotron. 

Properties of X Rays. X rays (except for the very soft- 
est) are able to penetrate through substances such as 
human flesh and metals. X rays are also able to affect 
the chemicals on a photographic plate. This means that 
"shadow" records can be made of the inside of a human 
body or a steel casting, for example. Unlike light waves, 
X rays cannot be readily focused. X rays of a given 
wave length do not penetrate all substances equally 
well. Waves produced at 100,000 volts, for example, 
penetrate the human flesh very readily, but do not pene- 
trate bones so easily. Therefore, a shadow pattern of 
the bone or other more absorbing tissue may be seen 
upon an X-ray plate. X rays are also able to afifect cer- 
tain chemicals and make them fluoresce. This means 
that these chemicals will glow brightly as long as the 
X rays are striking them. This is applied in thefliwro- 
scope, which is commonly used in examining the chests 
of persons for signs of such diseases as tuberculosis. 
(See Fluoroscope.) In 1949, the Swedish radiologist 
Arne Frantzell announced that he had developed an 
X-ray method for photographing the soft parts of the 
body, such as muscles, fat, and skin around the bones. 



Even though ordinary 100,000-volt X rays are able 
to penetrate many different substances readily, they 
cannot — as light does — pass easily through glass. Softer 
X rays are even absorbed in air. Lead is effective in 
stopping X rays, and lead-containing glass is used on 
fluoroscope screens and other parts of X-ray equipment. 

X rays also have an effect upon the tissues of living 
things. When absorbed, they can destroy or "burn" tis- 
sue. Thus, ordinary X rays are very dangerous to the 
human body. Other kinds of X rays are able to affect 
the genes in the germ cells of living things. In this way 
heredity itself can be changed. 

Uses of X Rays. There are a great many important 
medical uses of X rays. One of these involves the diag- 
nosis of diseased conditions within the human body. 
By means of X rays, doctors are able to see the outlines 
of broken bones — and to set them properly under the 
fluoroscope; they can detect bullets or other foreign 
bodies in tissues. In some cases they can observe gall 
stones or abscesses at the roots of teeth. X-ray fluoro- 
scope machines are widely used in examinations for 



A Betatron Produces High-Energy X Rays. The upper 
drawing is a sectional view looking from the side. The lower view 
is from the top. Electrons whirl around the acceleration chamber 
250,000 times in ^\„ second. The voltage of the electrons is 
increased until they ore shot at a target with sufficient force to 
produce X rays of very high energy. 




_^^ 



Sav 




448 




X Rays Revealed Hidden Features of the 

painting, above, probably by Titian. After cleaning, 
three heads show in the painting, betow. The X ray, 
right, penetrated the top paint to reveal another 
portrait and a different view of the central figure. 







Copyright reserved to H.M. The Queen 



cases of tuberculosis of the lungs. Pictures of some of the 
internal organs of tlie body may be taken by supple- 
mentary means. By having the patient drink liquids con- 
taining compounds of barium, for example, the doctor 
is able to take X-ray pictures of the stomach, which may 
indicate the presence of ulcers or cancer. 

The other important medical use of X rays is in the 
treatment of cancer itself. Hard X rays kill the newly 
growing cells that are found in cancers and similar 
tumors. However, these X rays also have a harmful 
effect upon the healthy cells nearby. For tliis reason 
great care must be taken in applying X rays to cancers. 
Because of these effects of X rays, X-ray equipment is 
often housed in lead-lined rooms, and workers around 
the equipment are protected by special garments and 
by lead or lead-glass shields. 

In science, X rays have a wide variety of uses. In a 
branch of analysis known as X-ray crystallography scien- 
tists have been able to discover a great many things 
about the way atoms are arranged in crystals and hence 
in the molecules of chemical substances. This permits 
knowledge, for example, of the arrangements of the 
molecules which are responsible for the fact that nibber 
stretches, or that oil is a good lubricant. X rays are also 
valuable in analyzing the chemical content of sub- 
stances. The way in which the rays are scattered permits 
the "fingerprinting" of chemicals. A catalog of many 
thousands of such identifying patterns has been made 
and is available to industrial scientists. Furthermore, 
when a beam of X rays is shot through a substance, a 
delicate measuring device shows how much X radi- 
ation is absorbed. Such measuring devices are so sensi- 
tive that they can show the difference in the amount of 
X rays absorbed between 99 and 100 sheets of paper. 
This makes it possible for the scientist to know how- 
much of certain materials may be found in the sub- 
stance. In this way the amount of ethyl in gasoline 
can be measured readily. .'Mso, scientists use X ra&gt;'S to 
analyze the pigments in oil paintings, in some cases 
permitting the identification of die painter. In X-ray 
spectroscopy, X rays are made to yield information con- 



cerning the electronic configurations deep inside atoms. 
High-energy X rays produced in the betatron and 
synchrotron enable scientists to produce and study the 
atomic particles called mesons. See Meson. 

In Industry, in addition to the applications already 
described, X rays are widely used to examine castings 
and other objects whose flaws may not appear on the 
surface. X rays are applied directly on the production 
line to examine metals, plastics, rubber insulation, and 
similar materials. Some machines have been developed 
which will take X-ray pictures of entire automobiles, 
although most X-ray machines concentrate upon 
smaller areas. During World War II a small X-ray ma- 
chine, called the Inspectoscope, was used by the army 
to examine quickly the packages sent back home by 
soldiers. By use of the Inspectoscope, army and navy 
officials were able to determine whether any illegal 
arms or other objects were being sent back in the 
baggage of American troops. 

Equipment. There are a great many different kinds of 
X-ray equipment, depending upon the application. The 
machines vary in size from that of dental X-ray equip)- 
ment or small portable industrial units to the huge 
machines used for examining large castings, or die 

larger betatrons. Raymond Pepinsky 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Betatron Fluoroscope Radioactivity 

Bragg, Gamma Rays Roentgen, Wilhelm K. 

Sir William H. Light (color Siegbahn, 

pictures) Karl M. G. 

Radiation Synchrotron 



Breeding 
Cancer 



Electronics 

XANTHIPPE, ^a;; TIP ee, or XANTIPPE, was the wife 
of Socrates. She may have been 40 years younger than 
the great philosopher, and some historians say she be- 
longed to the family of Pericles. Later generations 
believed that she had a poor disposition and a bitter 
tongue, and that Socrates married her simply to dis- 
cipline himself and acquire self-control. But there is no 
proof of this. See also Socr.\tes. c. br.\dford vvellej 

XANTHOPHYLL.SeeLEAF(WhytheLeafTurnsColor). 



449 




St. Xavler College 

St. Francis Xavier Was a Roman Catholic Missionary. 

XAVIER, ;^.ir i77( )/;, SAINT FRANCIS (1506-1552), 
was a Jesuit missionary. He is also called the Apostle 
of the Indus. Most of his work was done in the Far 
East. 

Saint Francis Xavier was born Francisco de Xavter 
near Sanguesa, Spain. His study in Paris brought him 
acquaintance with Ignatius of Loyola, with whom he 
helped to found the Society of Jesus. He accompanied 
Ignatius to Italy, doing hospital and missionary work, 
and was ordained a priest in 1537. He remained in 
Rome as secretary to the Jesuit society until 1540. 



Xavier was sent in that year by John III of Portugal 
to spread Christianity in the Portuguese possessions in 
India. He landed in Goa, on the Malabar Coast, in 
1 542. His preaching in Travancore, at Malacca, and in 
Japan gained many converts to the Roman Catholic 
Church. He planned a mission to China, but died on 
the island of Shangchwan (Saint John Island) while 
trying to gain admission to the mainland. His body lies 
in a shrine in Goa. He was declared a saint in 1622. 

Xavier was credited in his own day with possessing 
the gift of tongues, but he strongly denied it. Many 
miracles were credited to him. He was one of the great- 
est missionaries and explorers in the Far East, and his 
converts numbered hundreds of thousands. Saint 
Francis Xavier was an efficient organizer and a very 
capable man. His feast day is December 3. Fulton j. Sheen 

See also Jesuit; Missions and Missionaries. 

XAVIER UNIVERSITY is a Jesuit liberal arts and 
sciences school in Cincinnati, Ohio. It offers under- 
graduate and graduate degrees, and has a division in 
Milford, Ohio. The undergraduate day division admits 
men only. But women attend evening college and 
graduate division courses. The school was founded in 
1831. For enrollment, see Universities and Colleges 

(table). Paul L. o'Connor 

XAVIER UNIVERSITY is a private coeducational 
school in New Orleans, La. The Sisters of the Blessed 
Sacrament, an order of the Roman Catholic Church, 
operate it. The university includes a graduate school 
of arts and sciences, colleges of arts and sciences and of 
pharmacy, and a summer school. The university was 
founded in 1925. For enrollment, see Universities 
AND Colleges (table). skter mary josephina 

XENON, ZEE nalin, is a chemical element that 
makes up about one part in 20,000,000 of the earth's 
atmosphere. The British chemists Sir VVilliain Ramsay 
and Morris W. Travers discovered it in 1898. Industiy 
uses xenon in filling flash lamps and other powerful 
lamps. Xenon is also used to make bubble chambers, in- 



Xenophon Gave Thanks to the Gods as His "Ten Thousand" Finished Their 1,S00-Mile Retreat to the Bosporus. 




450 



■3!3«.»&lt; - » 




////tin 



t////in gi^ P 
it/mit Sf 
tsi/tlll ^~ ' 



A^^sBlft^ 



Xerxes I Grimly Witnessed the Defeat of His Fleet at the 

Battle of Salamis. The Greek ships drove into the heart of the 

struments used by physicists to study nuclear particles. 

Xenon is a colorless, odorless, tasteless gas. It is 
classed as an inert gas because it does not react readily 
with other substances. Its symbol is Xe. It has the 
atomic number 54. and an atomic weight of 131.30. 
Scientists once believed that xenon could not form 
chemical compounds. Bui in 1962, scientists at Argonne 
National Laboratoiy in .Argonne, 111., made it combine 
chemically with fluorine. Xenon is obtained as a by- 
product of liquid air production. Fr.^nk c. Andrews 

See also R.\Ms.^v, Sir William. 

XENOPHON, ~EH.\ oh fun (?434 b.c.-?355 b.c), was 
a Greek soldier and historian. Although a man of action, 
he is best known as a writer. 

Xenophon was born in Athens of a noble family. He 
studied under Socrates, but was more interested in mili- 
tary subjects than in philosophy. In 401 b.c, he joined a 
large band of Greek adventurers, led by the Persian 
prince, Cyrus the Younger. Cyrus wanted to seize the 
throne of Persia from his brother Artaxerxes. But Cyrus 
was killed in the battle of Cunaxa, and the Greek com- 
manders were killed soon afterward. The 10,000 Greek 
adventurers \\'ere stranded in a strange country without 
commanders. They chose Xenophon as their leader and 
began their retreat. Xenophon described this 1 ,500- 
mile march in Anabasis, a history of the expedition. 

After mondis of hardships, the adventurers reached 
Trapezus, a city on the Black Sea. They served for a 
time with a Thessalian king, then joined a Spartan 
army in a battle against the Persians. In the last cam- 
paign, Xenophon captured a wealthy Persian and 
forced him to pay an enormotis ransom. The Persian's 
ransom made Xenophon financially independent for 
the rest of his life. He settled in the district of Elis and 
devoted himself to writing. Xenophon wrote Hellemca, a 
history of Greece; Memorabilia of Socrates, an account 
of the life and teachings of Socrates; and Cyropaedia, 
a life of Cyrus the Great. C. Bradford Welles 

XEROGRAPHY. See Printing. 

XEROPHYTE. See Plant (Where Plants Live). 



Persian fleet and wiped it out. Xerxes was enraged, because 
this defeat meant the end of his plan of conquest. 

XERXES, ^URK seez, was the name of two kings of 
Persia. 

Xerxes I (?519 b.c.-?465 b.c.) was the son of Darius 
I, and the grandson of Cyrus the Great (see Darius [I]). 
He came to the throne in 485 B.C. His first act was to 
put down a revolt in Egypt. Then he devoted himself 
to the conquest of Greece to avenge his father's de- 
feat at Marathon. Xerxes also wanted to punish the 
Greeks for their part in the Ionian rebellion. In 483 B.C., 
he collected perhaps the largest army that had ever 
been assembled. It included over 180,000 men drawn 
from all parts of the empire. Xerxes set out with an 
immense fleet that the Phoenicians had assembled for 
him. He used a double line of ships to form two bridges 
across the Hellespont, and cut a canal through the 
isthmus of Mount .A_thos Peninsula. In 480 B.C., Xerxes 
sent his army across the Hellespont and invaded 
Greece. See Greece, Ancient (The Persian Wars). 

Xerxes won a victory at Thermopylae (see Ther- 
mopylae). He entered Athens and burned all the houses 
and temples. But in 480 B.C., his fleet was crushed at the 
battle of Salamis (see Salamis). His army was helpless 
without supply ships. Xer.xes was forced to withdraw. 
He left a force under Mardonius, and returned to the 
Hellespont. The next year, the Greeks defeated Mar- 
donius at Plataea. 

The Greek sources, however, probably present a one- 
sided picture of Xerxes. His venture in Greece was a 
failure, but it was offset by such successes as the re- 
covery of Egypt and a series of other victories. He was 
also a great builder and a wise administrator. His son, 
.Arta-xerees I, succeeded him to the throne. 

Xerxes II (?450 b.c.-?424 b.c.) came to the throne of 
Persia in 424 b.c, after the murder of his father, 
Artaxerxes I. But the reign of Xer.xes lasted for only 45 
days. His half-brother, Sogdianus, murdered him and 
seized the throne. Sogdianus hiinself was murdered soon 
afterward. e. a. speiser 

See also .Ahasuerus. 

XMAS. See Christmas (History). 



451 



XOCHIMILCO 

XOCHIMILCO. See Lake Xochimilco. 

XYLEM. See Cambium. 

XYLOPHONE, ^T loh John, is a percussion musical 
insti-ument. Players produce tones by striking the 
wooden sounding bars with hard mallets. The xylo- 
phones used now have a metal resonating, or sounding, 
tube under each bar. The lack of resonators in the first 
xylophones and their higher pitch were the chief dis- 
tinguishing features between this instrument and the 
marimba. The .xylophone has a range of three octaves or 
more. Musicians in orchestras and bands use it for 
special effects and occasionally for solo playing. Two 
similar instruments are the vibraphone and the orchestra 
bells. The vibraphone has metal bars and resonators. 
An electric motor operates a butterfly valve at the top of 
each resonator. These valves help the vibraphone pro- 
duce a rich, brilliant tone. Danse Macabre, by the French 
composer Saint-Saens, requires a xylophone. 

The xylophone is an old instrament. It is related to 
many Oriental instruments and was common among the 
iSlavic peoples. The sounding bars of the early instru- 
ments were often made of glass or pinewood. Rosewood 
is more commonly used now. Charles b. Righter 

See also Marimba; Orchestra Bells. 

XYZ AFFAIR was the name given to an exchange of 
diplomatic proposals between France and the United 
States. In 1 798, relations between the governments of 
the United Slates and France were strained. The French 
government grew bitter because the United States 
refused to help France in its war against Great Britain. 
French leaders became furious when the United States 
signed the Jay Treaty with Great Britain in 1 794. This 
treaty brought to a peaceful settlement various Amer- 
ican-British problems which arose from boundary and 
trade disputes. The angry French seized cargoes from 
United States ships, and forced United States seamen 
to serve on French vessels. The Directory then governing 
France refused to receive the U.S. Minister, General 
Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, whom President George 
Washington had appointed. 

The next President, John Adams, had no desire to 
declare war on France. So he sent three special ambas- 
sadors to France to seek a peaceful settlement. The 
ambassadors were Pinckney, John Marshall, and 
Elbridge Geri-y. The French Foreign Minister, Prince 
Talleyrand, stalled the discussions for some weeks. 
Then he appointed three agents to deal with the Amer- 
icans. The agents insulted the Americans with various 
dishonorable proposals. One proposal demanded a loan 
for France and a large gift, or bribe, for Talleyrand. 



Sounding Bars 



Belts (Bases) 



Stand 




The Xylophone is a percus- 
sion instrument played by 
stril&lt;ing wooden bars with mal- 
lets. Orchestras and bands 
often use xylophones for spe- 
cial effects. 



Chicago .Symphony Oichpstra 



Another required payment for certain critical remarks 
that President Adams had made to Congress about 
France. When asked for his reply. Ambassador Pinck- 
ney said, 'Tt is No! No! Not a sixpence." The slogan 
"Millions for defense, but not one cent for tribute" is 
often credited to Pinckney. It was actually written by 
Robert Goodloe Harper in a magazine article. 

President Adams made an official report of these 
proposals to the United States Congress. He did not 
name Talleyrand's agents, but simply referred to them 
as X, Y, and Z. President Adams told Congress: "I will 
never send another minister to France without assur- 
ance that he will be received, respected, and honored 
as the representative of a great, free, powerful, and in- 
dependent nation." 

The United States did not declare war on France, but 
did take steps to raise an army. American privateers 
received permission to attack armed French vessels. The 
XYZ Affair aroused indignation among citizens of both 
France and the United States. In 1800, a second Ameri- 
can commission arranged for a friendly settlement with 
France. eucene c. barker 

See also Adams, John (Difficulties with France); 
Gerry, Elbridge; Marshall, John; Pinckney (Charles 
Cotesworth); Talleyrand. 



452 



H 



W 



B 



K 



yf ^^r is the 25th letter of our alphabet. 

I W It came from a symbol used by the 

B ^ Semites, who once lived in Syria 

and Palestine. They named it wmv, their word for hook, 
and adapted an Egyptian hieroglyphic, or picture symbol. 
Waw was also the origin of F, U, ]', and IV. The Greeks 
later took the symbol into their alphabet, and gave it its 
capital Y form. They called it upsilon. The Romans did 
not need the letter when writing Latin words, but they 
used it when writing words taken from Greek. See 
Alphabet. 

Uses. T or )' is about the 17th most frequendy used 
letter in books, newspapers, and other printed material 
in English. Y represents the word young in many abbre- 
viations, such as I'MCA for I'oung M ell's Christian Asso- 
ciation. In archaic words, such as ye in Ye Olde Tea 
Shoppe, y represents a discarded Anglo-Saxon character 
called thorn. The thorn resembled )' in appearance, and 
had the sound of //;. In chemistry, )' represents the 
metallic element yttrium. 

Pronunciation. Y or y may be either a vowel or a 
consonant. In English, a person pronounces the conso- 
nant y by placing the front of his tongue near his hard 
palate, and then gliding his tongue into position to 
make the sound of the vowel that follows. The velum, 
or soft palate, is closed, and the vocal cords vibrate. As 
a vowel, V may have the sound of long ; as in my and fly; 
that of short i as in myth and nymph: or that of u as in 
myrtle. See Pronunciation. i. j. gelb ..n.i j. m. Wells 



Atlantic Ocean 



ROME 




The 25th letter took its shape from an ancient Egyptian 
symbol for o supporting pole. The Greeks were the 
first to give it the wye sound we use it for today. 



.^BHP^^SSsfc, 




The Romans, about A.D. 1 1 4, 
used the letter when writing 
words borrowed from Greek. 



T 



The Greeks, about 600 B.C., 
called their letter upsilon. 



PHOENICIA 

Mec/iferroneon Seo 



The Small Letter y developed from bh 
Roman writing in the A.D. 300's. Monks 
shaped the letter, and, by the 1 500's, 
it had the form that is used today, m 



'"»c, 



EGYPT • 



V' 



The Phoenicians, about 1 000 
B.C., used a symbol of a hook. 



A.D. 300 A.D. 1500 



The Egyptians, about 3000 B.C., 
used a symbol of a supporting pole. 




453 



Y-TEENS 

Y-TEENS are members of the Young Women's Chris- 
tian Association (YWCA) between the ages of 12 and 
18. The purpose of Y-Teen clubs is to serve the recrea- 
tional and health needs of girls, and to promote under- 
standing among girls of all races and creeds. 

The first Y-Teen club, founded in Oakland, Calif, 
in 1881, was called the Little Girls' Christian Association 
and served as a model for other girls' clubs that de- 
veloped in many other American cities. In 1918, the 
clubs changed their name to Girl Reserves and, in 1947, 
to Y-Teens. They have over 350.000 members in the 
United States. The clubs' national offices are at 600 
Lexington Ave., New York, N.Y. 10022. Id.^ Sloan Snyder 

YABLONOVYY MOUNTAINS, v//; bluh nuh VOY. or 
Yablonoi Mountains, lie east of Lake Baykal in Si- 
beria. For location, see Asia (color map). The range ex- 
tends northeast from northern Mongolia for about 1 ,000 
miles until it joins the Stanovoy Mountains. The Ya- 
blonovyy range is the dividing line between the rivers 
that flow into the Arctic Ocean and those that flow 
into the Pacific. Mount Sokhondo (8,228 feet) is the 
highest peak. Some of Russia's largest tin mines are 
located in these mountains. Theodore Shabad 

YACHT, yaht, is a vessel, usually a small one, that is 
used only for pleasure. A yacht may be any kind of 
vessel, from a small sailing craft to a steam-powered 
ocean-going ship. Modern yachts originated in The 
Netherlands, where they were called jaght boats, or hunt- 
ing boats. For more information on yachts, see Boats 
AND Boating. See also .Sailing. Carld. lane 

YADKIN RIVER. See Pee Dee River. 

YAFO. Sec Tel Aviv-Yafo. 

YAGUA INDIANS. See Peru (Way of Life). 

YAHWEH. See Jehovah. 

YAJUR-VEDA. See Veda. 

YAK, yak, is the wild ox of Asia. It inhabits the cold, 
dry plateaus of Tibet, often more than 16,000 feet 
above sea level. The wild yak stands more than 6 feet 
high at the shoulders. But it carries its head low with 
the nose almost touching the ground. It may weigh 
between 1,100 and 1,200 pounds. The yak is covered 
w ith black or brownish black hair. The hair is especially 
long and silky on shoulders, flanks, and tail. Sometimes 
it may even drag on the ground. The yak is an agile 
creature in spite of its bulk and grotesquely heavy fore- 
quarters. It can slide down icy mountainsides, swim the 
swiftest rivers, and skillfully cross steep rock slides. If 
the yak is forced to defend itself, it charges furiously. 
Its courage and sharp horns (much like those of a cow) 
make the yak dangerous to hunt. 

The domestic yak, often called the grunting ox be- 
cause of the sounds it makes, is the result of many 
generations of careful breeding. It is often white or 
piebald instead of black like the wild yak. Smaller 
and much more docile than its wild ancestor, it is 
useful in many ways. As a pack animal, it can carry a 
heavy load 20 miles a day. In Tibet, a country of 
nearly half a million square miles without railroads, the 
yak carries travelers and mail. It provides rich milk. Its 
flesh is dried or roasted for food. The soft hair of the 
domestic yak is used to make cloth, and the coarser 
hair for mats and tent coverings. Small saddles, whips, 
boots, and other articles are made from the hide. The 




The Yak of Asia is a relative of the American bison. Yaks 
thrive in the high, cold mountains of Tibet. 

bushy tail is used as a fly chaser at ceremonial proces- 
sions in India, and as an ornament for a tomb or 
shrine. 

Scientific Classification. The yak belongs to the cat- 
tle family, Bovulac. It is in the genus Bos, and is species 
B. grunnwns. Donald f. Hoffmeister 

See also Animal (color picture, Animals of the 
Mountains). 

YAKIMA, Wash. (pop. 43,284; alt. 980 ft,), is a food- 
processing and shipping center. It lies in the rich 
Yakima \'alley of south-central Washington, about 140 
miles southeast of Seattle. For location, see Washing- 
ton (political map). Many irrigated valley farms furnish 
fruits, potatoes, hops, sugar beets, wheat, poultiy, and 
dairy products for the city's processing and packing 
plants. Manufacture of farm machinery, agricultural 
chemicals, clay products, packing boxes, and lumber 
are important industries in Yakima. The city is the east- 
ern gateway to the recreational areas of the Cascade 
Mountains. Yakima is the name of the confederation 
of 14 Indian tribes that live on the nearby million-acre 
Yakima resei-vation. The city has a council-manager 
form of government. Howard j. Critchfield 

YAKUTS. .See Lena River. 

YALE, ELIHU (1649-1721), was an official of the 
East India Company and a benefactor of Yale Uni- 
versity. During 27 years' service in India, from 1672 to 
1699, he acquired a large fortune and became governor 
of Fort Saint George in Madras. 

After returning to England, Yale made many gifts 
to churches, schools, and 
missionary societies. He 
gave books and valuable 
goods to the Collegiate 
School which was founded 
by the Congregationalists 
in Connecticut. In 1718, in 
recognition of his generos- 
ity, the trustees changed 
the name of the school to 
Yale College. Yale was 
born in Boston, but was 
taken to England when he 
was three. He joined the 
East India Company in 

1670. Robert H. Bremner 



Elihu Yale 

Chicago Historical Society 




454 




Yale's Harkness Tower is 

parf of Memorial Quadrangle. 
The Gothic structure towers 
201 feet high. It was named 
for Charles W. Harkness, who 
was a Yale graduate and 
a benefactor of the school. 



Yale News Bureau 



YALE, LINUS, JR. (1821-1868), an inventor and man- 
ufacturer, is best known for his inventions of locks. He 
began to assist his father in developing bank locks in 
1849. He gained a wide reputation as an authority on 
these complicated devices, and held a number of pat- 
ents. After about 1862, Yale introduced several com- 
bination safe locks and key-operated cylinder locks 
which set the pattern for future development. In 1868, 
he established a lock factoi-y. He was born at Salisbury, 

N.Y., on April 4, 1821. Robert p. Multhauf 

See also Lock .•xnd Key. 

YALE UNIVERSITY is a privately endowed, non- 
sectarian school in New Haven, Conn. Chartered in 
1701, Yale is the third oldest university in the United 
States. Only Harvard University and the College of 
William and Mary are older. The undergraduate school, 
known as yale College, is open to men only. But Yale 
admits women to the graduate and professional schools. 
Yale students come from all 50 states; Washington, 
D.C.; Puerto Rico; The Virgin Islands; and about 90 
other countries. 

Yale graduates have always played a major role in 
American life. Many graduates have become leaders in 
government, business and industiy, the arts, and com- 
munity services. The presidents of about 70 universi- 
ties and colleges in the United States were graduated 
from Yale. 

The Yale Campus covers about 175 acres. Connect- 
icut Hall, built in 1752, is the oldest building at the 
university. This red brick building is the only structure 
left on the campus from colonial days. In recent 
years, famous Aiiierican architects have constructed 
more than 25 buildings at Yale, including a new 
science center. 

Freshmen live on the Old Campus, the site of the 
original school. Sophomores, juniors, and seniors live 
in 12 residential colleges. Each college houses about 
280 students and some faculty members. Each college 
has its own library, common rooms, and dining hall. 
The colleges compete with each other in several 
sports. The college residence plan started in 1933 
through the gifts of Edward S. Harkness, a Yale 
graduate. 

The Yale library, containing about 4,500,000 vol- 
umes, is one of the largest libraries in the world. Yale's 



Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library was dedi- 
cated in 1963. It is one of the largest buildings in 
the world devoted exclusively to rare books and manu- 
scripts. 

Yale's Peabody Museum of Natural History is one of 
the oldest museums connected with a university in the 
United States. It has many world-famous fossil ex- 
hibits. The university's art gallery is the oldest uni- 
versity art gallery in the United States. It serves as 
an important study aid for art and history of art 
students. 

The i'ale Daily Xews, established in 1878, is the 
oldest college daily newspaper in the United States. 
The Tale Literary Magazine, founded in 1836, was the 
first undergraduate magazine published in the United 
States. 

Educational System. Yale has 1 1 divisions, each 
under the supervision of its own dean and faculty. The 
divisions of the university include Yale College; the 
graduate school of arts and sciences; and the schools 
of engineering, medicine, divinity, law, art and archi- 
tecture, music, drama, forestry, and nursing. 

The Corporation of Yale University governs the 
school. The corporation consists of the university presi- 
dent, the governor and lieutenant governor of Con- 
necticut, and 1 6 /fWoiw (trustees). 

History. Yale was founded in 1701, when 10 Con- 
necticut clergymen met in the village of Branford and 
made a gift of books to found a college. Later that 
year, the General Assembly of Connecticut approved a 
charter for the Collegiate School. From 1 702 to 1 707, 
classes met in the home of Rector Abraham Pierson at 
Killingworth (now Clinton). 

Classes were held in Milford and then Saybrook be- 
fore the school moved to New Haven in 1716. Two 
years later, the school's only college building was still 
unfinished because of a lack of funds. Elihu Yale, a 
retired merchant in London, contributed money to the 
school in 1718 (see Yale, Elihu). Yale is sometimes 
called Old Eli. The same year, the school adopted its 
present name in honor of Yale. For enrollment, see Uni- 
versities AND Colleges (table). Carlos F. Stoddard, Jr. 

See also Law (picture, Famous University Law 
.Schools) . 

YALOBUSHA RIVER. See Yazoo Rwer. 

455 



YALTA 

YALTA, TAHL tuh (pop. 43,994; alt. 150 ft.), is a 
seaport in the Ukrainian .Soviet Socialist Republic, 
one of the republics of Russia. It is a favorite Russian 
winter resort. The city lies at the southern tip of the 
Crimean peninsula beside the Black Sea. For location, 
see RussL-k (coUjr map). 

YALTA CONFERENCE was a meeting held early in 
1945, between the leaders of the "Big Three" Allied 
nations. On February 4, President Franklin D. Roose- 
velt of the United States, Prime Minister Winston 
Churchill of Great Britain, and Premier Joseph Stalin 
of Russia met at the Livadia, an estate near Yalta, a 
famous Black Sea resort in the Crimea. 

On February 1 1, the three leaders issued a statement. 
They agreed on plans to occupy Germany, set up a new 
Polish government, and hold the San Francisco Con- 
ference to form the United Nations. They again en- 
dorsed the Atlantic Charter. 

Later reports of the Conference revealed that Stalin 
had promised that Russia would declare war on Japan 
within three months after Germany's surrender. In re- 
turn for this promise, Russia was promised the Kuril Is- 
lands and the southern part of Sakhalin Island, which 
Japan then controlled, as well as other concessions. 
Russia did declare war on Japan, but only after the first 
atomic bomb had fallen on Hiroshima. It also seized 
Manchuria and North Korea, and set the stage for the 
Korean War. The Russians did not allow free elections 
to be held in Poland as they had agreed, and they used 
the Yalta agreements as an excuse to enslave millions 
of people. 

The Conference led to much political controversy in 
the United States. In March, 1955, the Department of 
State released the Yalta Papers, which told the full story 
of the Conference. p.^yson s. Wild, Jr. 

.See also S.^n Francisco Conference. 

YALU RIVER, YAH LOO, rises from the highest peak 
of the Changpai .Shan, or Long White Mountains, of 
Manchuria. The 500-milc-long river forms most of the 
boundary between North Korea and Manchuria as it 
flows to the Yellow Sea. The Yalu River became im- 
portant during the Korean War. Chinese communists 
entered the war when they crossed the Yalu on Oct. 
25, 1950. United Nations forces reached the river 27 

days later. J. E. Spencer 

YAM is a tropical plant which has thick roots much 
like those of the sweet potato. Yams are good to eat. 
The plant has slender, climbing stems, and bears small 
green flowers in clusters. The root has less starch than 
the white potato, but has more sugar. It usually has an 
acid taste when raw, but this disappears when the yam 
is cooked. Juicy varieties of sweet potatoes are often 
wrongly called )'anis. 

Scientific Classification. Yams belong to the yam fam- 
ily Dioscoreaceae. The edible yam is genus Dioscorea, 
species D. alata. Arthur J. Pratt 

See also Sweet Potato; Cortisone (picture). 

YAMACRAW BLUFF. See Georgia (Interesting 
Places to Visit). 

YAMAMOTO, yah muh MOH toll, ISOROKU (1884- 
1943), commanded the Japanese combined fleet at the 
time of the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 . He was one 
of Japan's great admirals, with a long and distinguished 



career in war and peace. He opposed the policies that 
led to war with the United States. But he sponsored the 
planning that led to the Pearl Harbor attack as Japan's 
only chance of victory. Yamamoto was born in Niigata. 
He was killed in 1943 when his plane was shot down 
in the South Pacific. Maru s B. Jansen 

YAMASHITA,^;//) MAHshee tah, TOMOBUMI (1885- 
1946), a Japanese general in World War II, was exe- 
cuted for "violation of the laws of war." A brilliant field 
commander, Yamashita advanced rapidly on the gen- 
eral staff and in Korea and Manchuria. He became fa- 
mous for the campaign against Malaya and Singapore 
in 1942. Later, he served in Manchuria until he took 
charge of the defense of the Philippines in 1944. Yama- 
shita was born in Kochi prefecture. Marius b. Jansen 

YANCEY, WILLIAM LOWNDES (1814-1863), an 
American statesman, was often called "The Orator of 
Secession." Always active in politics, he held only one 
public office, as a Democrat from Alabama in the 
L'nited States House of Representatives (1844-1846). 
He devoted himself afterward to arousing the South to 
defend its rights. 

Yancey's ".'MabaiTia Platform" demanded that south- 
erners have the right to take their slaves into western 
territories. He opposed the Compromise of 1850. In 
1858, he tried to organize a League of L'nited Southern- 
ers to work for southern rights in both political parties. 

Yancey opposed .Stephen A. Douglas' candidacy for 
the Democratic presidential nomination in I860, and 
supported John C. Breckinridge. He drew up Alabama's 
Secession Ordinance. Later he was a Confederate com- 
missioner to Europe, and a Confederate senator from 
Alabama. Yancey was born in Warren County, Georgia. 
He practiced law and edited a newspaper in Greenville, 
S.C., before moving to Alabama. w. B. Hesseltine 

YANG, CHEN NING (1922- ), a Chinese-born 
physicist, shared the 1957 Nobel prize in physics with 
Tsung Dao Lee (see Lee, Tsung D.-vo). They received 
the award for their contributions to the laws of funda- 
mental particles. They disproved the law ol conservation 
of parity, which concerned the physical interactions 
of fundamental nuclear particles. Yang was born in 
Hofei, Anhwei, China. He became a staff member at 
the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton in 1949. 
See also Nobel Prizes (picture). Raeph e. Lapp 

YANGTZE KIANG, FANG see KYANO, or Yang- 
tze River, is one of the world's greatest rivers, and the 
longest and most important stream in China. To most 
Chinese, the Yangtze is known as the Ch'ang Chiang, or 
long river. The Yangtze rises in the Kunlun Mountains 
of Tibet, 16,000 feet above sea level. The river flows 
east, southeast, and then south into the province of 
Yunnan. From here it winds about in a great double 
curve and flows northeast across Szechwan Province. 
It then follows an irregular course east through central 
China, and enters the Yellow Sea 3,100 miles from its 
source. The Yangtze and its branches drain nearly 
706,000 square miles. 

The high mountains at the Yangtze's source cause it 
to flow rapidly for most of its length. The great gorges 
in its upper parts above Ichang make it one of the most 
beautiful rivers in the world. Just above Ichang is per- 
haps the largest single potential hydroelectric site in the 
world. In places, mountains more than a mile high form 
the banks of the Yangtze. About half of China's ocean 



The Yangtze River winds its 
way through the deep Chutang 
Gorge in the Szechwan Province 
of China. Thousands of small 
boats — junks, barges, sampans, 
and steamers — transport peo- 
ple and goods on this important 
Chinese River. 




commerce is distributed over the Yangtze and its 
branches. Ocean steamers reach Hankou, 680 river- 
miles from the coast, and smaller boats can go 1,000 
miles farther inland. 

Thousands of Chinese live on the Yangtze on sailing 
craft called junks. Millions of Chinese live on the banks 
of this great river. Occasional summer floods temporar- 
ily drive many people from their homes. Among the 
great cities along the Yangtze River are Shanghai, 
Nanking, Anking, Ichang, Chungking, and the twin 
cities of Hankou and Wuchang. J. E. Spencer 

See also River (picture, Longest Rivers). 

YANK was a weekly magazine for soldiers published 
during World War II by the United States Army, rank 
was written and edited by a staff of enlisted men. i'a/ik 
contained excellent features, and was credited with 
many exclusive stories on the course of the war. The 
first issue of Tank appeared on June 1 7, 1942. The mag- 
azine was discontinued at the end of 1945. 

More than 2,600.000 soldiers read I'ank. It was 
printed in 21 regional editions, which reached such 
distant places as Iran, India, Egypt, England, and 

France. Earl Franklin English 

YANKEE. People of other countries often call any 
person from the United States a Yankee. In the south- 
ern United States, the word I'ankee means a Northerner, 
or someone who comes from north of Mason and Di.x- 
on's line. But most of the people of the United States 
use the word Yankee to mean a New Englander. 

People often say drat someone is " 'shrewd as a Yankee" 
or "clever as a Yankee." The people of eady New Eng- 
land had to develop great shrewdness and cleverness as 



they struggled to make homes and create industries in 
the rocky wilderness. "Yankee peddlers" roamed far and 
wide through the American colonies, selling the articles 
made by Yankee craftsmen. These peddlers won a 
great reputation for getting high prices. 

No one is certain where the word Yankee came from. 
Some dictionaries state that the English word Yankee 
comes from the Scottish woxA yankie . Ayankie is a sharp 
and clever woman. Other dictionaries suggest diat Yan- 
kee is an Indian pronunciation of the word English, or 
of the French word for English, which is Anglais. The 
word I'ankee may have had a Dutch origin. Early Flem- 
ish people sometimes called persons from The Nether- 
lands Jan Kees, which was short for the common Dutch 
names Jan and Cornelis. Some authorities believe that 
the people of Flanders gave the same name to Nether- 
landers who lived in North America. 

The first person to spread the word Yankee very 
widely was a farmer of Cambridge, Mass. , named Jona- 
than Hastings. He used the word in the early 1 700"s to 
express the idea of excellence, speaking of a "Yankee 
good horse," or "Yankee cider." Harvard students who 
hired horses from Hastings began to use die expression. 
The word was widely used during die Revolutionary 
\Var, when British soldiers made fun of New England 
troops by calling them Yankees. During the Civil War, 
Confederate soldiers called Federal troops "Yankees." 
When United States troops arrived in Paris in 1917, the 
French press hailed them as Yankees or Yanks. Euro- 
peans have continued to use the word as a name for 
American soldiers. John R. Alden 

See also Yankee Doodle. 

457 



YANKEE DOODLE 

YANKEE DOODLE is a song that has been popular in 
America since colonial days. The tune is an old one. It 
may have begun in southern Europe in the Middle 
Ages. About 1500 it was popular in Holland, where the 
harvesters sang it. The verses began with the meaning- 
less words: 

Yanker dudel doodle down. 
The song was sung to small children in England dur- 
ing Shakespeare's time. Later the tune was used for a 
rhyme that began: 

Lucy Locket lost her pocket, 

Kitty Fisher found it; 
Nothing in it, nothing in it, 
Save the binding round it. 

Another English form of the Yankee Doodle tune was 
sung by the Cavaliers in the 1600's. They made up 
words to poke fun at Oliver Cromwell when he rode 
down from Canterbury to take charge of the Puritan 
forces. 

Yankee Doodle came to town 

Upon a Kentish pony. 
He stuck a feather in his cap 
And called it macaroni. 
At that time the word macaroni was used to mean the 
young men of London who dressed in odd Italian styles. 



The words of "Yankee Doodle" known in the United 
States were written by an English army surgeon, Dr. 
Richard .Schuckburgh. The song made fun of the un- 
trained American troops during the French and Indian 
War in 1755. 

But the American troops liked "Yankee Doodle" and 
the song soon became popular. "Yankee Doodle" was 
well known all through the American colonies by the 
time of the Revolutionary War. The first printed notice 
of it in America appeared in the New York Journal on 
October 12, 1768. 

"Yankee Doodle" was 
sung and played in every 
patriot camp. American 
soldiers often whistled it in 
batde. The British heard 
it so often during their 
retreat from C^oncord that 
General Gage is said to 
have exclaimed, "I hope I 
shall never hear that time 
again!" But the British did 
hear it again. American 
bands played it as the Brit- 
ish left after the surrender at 

YorktOWn. Raymond Kendall 




i 



Soldiers of the Revolutionary War Marched and Fought to the Tune of "Yankee Doodle." 



-* ^ 



■Ml c c p n r 1^ c "^ I c=f-g-^ 



w 



1. Fa th«r and 1 weni duwD lo c«mp, A • long with Cap Uio Good • win. And 

2. And (here wu Cap tajo Wash • ing ion. Up on a sUp ■ ping stal lioo, And 

3. And then the fcaih • en on bis hai. They looked so 'Ur • nal 6 07 I 

4. And iben ihey bad a swamp - uig guD, A3 big as a log of ou pie. 



4L^^ i c-i-T- J i jij J i J l - J j jljjj J i 



i f'^t r-fO* I ^"^nr^Tj 



^^^ 



^ 



c c g n.g P=1^-^^^-^ 



J. \&gt;^ :' ji,r J^ 



^^ 



there we saw the men and boys. As thick as has - ly pud dm'. 

giv loe or ■ ders to his men. I guess there was a mil lion, 

want - e&lt;r pes • ke ty lo get. To give to my Je - mi na. 

On a deuc • ed In tie cart, A load for fa • iber's cat lie 



• kee Doo - die keep it op, 




Van kee Doo ■ die dao dy. Mind the mu • sic and the step. And with the girls be baod 




^E 



C^ CJ-L^ ^ 



r-J' r-^ I fJ' r--/ I r u* 1 1" C-in 



458 



YANKEE PEDDLER. See Colonial Life in America 
(Domestic Commerce). 

YANKTON, S.Dak. (pop. 9,279; alt. 1,205 ft.), is a 
wholesale and retail center on the Missouri River in 
southeastern .South Dakota. It was first settled in 1858, 
and named for the Yankton tribe of the Sioux Indians. 
It became the capital of the Dakota Territory, organ- 
ized in 1861 to include North Dakota, .South Dakota, 
and all land west to the Rockies. Mount Marty College 
is there. Yankton has a council-manager government. 
YANKTON COLLEGE. See Universities and Col- 
leges (table). 

YAOUNDE, YAH OON DAT (pop. 80.100; alt. 
2,470 ft.), is tlie capital of Cameroon. For location, see 
Cameroon (map). It is a center of commerce and trans- 
portation for the area. Yaounde was founded in 1888 
and became the capital of Cameroon in 1922. 

YAP ISLANDS form an island group in the western 
Pacific Ocean. The group is part of the Caroline Islands. 
It lies about 1,000 miles east of the central Philippines 
and about 2,000 miles south of Yokohama, Japan. For 
location, see Pacific Ocean (color map). The Yap Is- 
lands are the chief islands of Yap District, one of six 
administrative districts of the Trust Territory of the 
Pacific Islands. Yap Disuict has a population of 6,293 
and covers 46 square miles. The \'ap Islands include 
four large islands and 10 .smaller islands. The main is- 
lands are Yap (the largest), Gagil-Tomil, Map, and 
Rumung. The island group covers 39 scjuare miles and 
has a population of 3,792. 

The islands are composed of ancient cr)stalline rocks 
and have a rugged surface. Long, narrow channels sepa- 
rate the islands, and coral reefs surround them. One 
large break in the reefs allows small vessels to enter a 
natural harbor. 

The people are Micronesians with mixtures of Indo- 
nesian stock. The women do most of the work in the 
fields. Tare, bananas, yams, coconuts, and tropical 
fruits are the main crops. The men dive under water 
with spears to catch fish. The people of Yap judge a 
person's wealth by the number of large limestone disks 
he owns. These disks are quarried in nearby Palau and 
transported to Yap on rafts. 

Spaniards first discovered and controlled Yap. In 
1899, Spain sold the islands to Germany. In 1905, Yap 
became internationally important as a cable station 
between the United States, the Netherlands Indies 
(now Indonesia), and Japan. After World War I, the 
League of Nations put Yap under Japanese mandate. 
The United .States protested this action. In 1921, the two 
countries signed a treaty by which the United States 
recognized Japan's mandate. Japan granted the Lf.S. 
equal rights to cable and radio service through Yap, and 
allowed U..S. citizens free entry into the islands. 

During World War II, the Japanese used the island 
group as a naval and air base. American troops occu- 
pied Yap after die war ended, and in 1947 the islands 
came under control of the LInited Slates, as a trustee- 
ship under the United Nations. Edwin h. Bryan, Jr. 
See also Caroline Islands; Pacific Islands, Trust 
Territory of the; Money (picture, a Pocketful of 
Change). 

YAPOK, yuh PAHK, is a South American opossum. 
It is rarely seen because it hides during the day and 
comes out at night to hunt crayfish and insects. 



YAWL 

YAQUI INDIANS. See Mask (picture, Mexican Yaqui 
Indians). 

YARD is a unit of length. It is equal to 3 feet, or 36 
inches. Originally, the yard was the distance from the 
nose to about the end of the thumb, of the English 
king, Henry I. In 1866, England established the yard 
as the length of a specified bronze bar at 62°F. In the 
LTnited States it is defined as being equal to 0.9144 of 1 
meter. See also Weights and Measures. 







The Legal Yard in the time of King Henry I of England was 
the distance from the king's nose to obout the end of his thumb. 

YARKAND. See Soche. 

YARMOUTH. See Great Yarmouth. 

YARMOUTH, I'AHR muth. Nova Scotia (pop. 8,636; 
alt. 31 ft.), lies at the entrance to the Bay of Fundy 
(see Nova Scotia [color map]). Yarmouth, the county 
seat of Yarmouth County, is an attractive summer re- 
sort. It also serves as an agricultural center. Its indus- 
tries include lobster fishing, fish processing, textile man- 
ufacturing, and lumbering. Some historians believe it 
was the site of the first settlement of Norsemen in North 
America, in a.d. 980. New England settlers founded 
Yarmouth in 1761. Thomas H. Raddall 

YARN. .See Cotton (.Spinning); Wool. 

YATES, ELIZABETH (1905- ' ), an American author, 
won the New bery medal in 1951 for Amos Fortune, Free 
Man, a biography of an American slave who purchased 
his freedom. Her other works include High Holiday 
(1938), Once in the Tear (1947), and A Place for Peter 
(1952). She was born in Buffalo, N.Y. 

y AVI AT A, yah wah tah, is the chief center of Japan's 
heavy industry. It lies on the coast of northern Kyushu. 
Japanese government mills there make pig iron from 
imported ore and produce much of Japan's steel. The 
city is near coal mines and has coke plants. It is part of 
the city of Kitakyushu (see Kitakyushu). Yawata was 
the target of the first United States B-29 air raid on 
Japan, June 15, 1944. Hugh Borton 

YAWL is a two-masted sailboat. The back mast of 
the yawl, called the jigger, nuzzen, or dandy, is usually 
placed behind the rudder post. It is less than half the 
height of the mainmast. See Sailing (picture, Types of 
Sailboats). 



459 



YAWNING 

YAWNING is the act of opening the mouth wide, or 
gaping. The usual yawn is due to drowsiness or fatigue. 
It is a sign that the body needs sleep. Yawning is an 
involuntary refle.x. After the act has started, it is almost 
impossible to stop it. The victim can hold his mouth 
closed, but the yawning muscles still contract. 

People and animals yawn when oxygen is slowly cut 
off from them, and when the muscles are thoroughly 
relaxed. A person who yawns often is probably not get- 
ting enough o.xygen. He may need better ventilation, or 
exercise. He will generally stop yawning if he drinks a 
beverage, or bathes his face with cold water. Suggestion 
also causes yawning. Those who see others yawning are 
likely to yawn, too. .Scientists are not sure what part 
of the nervous system controls yawning, but it may be 
the mesencephalon (midbrain) in the brain. 

One purpose of yawning may be to aw'aken a person 
by stretching the muscles and helping the blood to cir- 
culate. Arthur C. Guvton 

YAZOO FRAUD. In 1795, Georgia's general as- 
sembly sold state-owned land on the Yazoo River to 
speculators. Most of the legislators were bribed. The 
people became indignant, and the legislature passed a 
Rescinding Act in 1 796. But the speculators refused to 
give up their bargain. The Supreme Court ruled in 1810 
that the Rescinding Act was unconstitutional. But, by 
this time, Georgia had sold its western lands to tlie 
federal government . Congress appropriated over S4,200,- 
000 to settle the Yazoo claims in 1814. albert b. Save 

YAZOO RIVER, VA^oo, a tributary of the Mississip- 
pi, drains about 13,400 square miles in the state of 
Klississippi. For location, see Mississippi (color map). 
The Tallahatchie and Yalobusha rivers unite to form 
the Yazoo River near Greenwood, Miss. The Yazoo 
River flows south for 188 miles and flows into the 
Mississippi River near Vicksburg, Miss. 

Light draft vessels can sail up the Yazoo-Tallahat- 
chie river system for about 230 miles. Four large flood- 
control reservoirs were built on Yazoo tributaries be- 
tween 1940 and 1954. They have greatly reduced flood 
damage in the fertile Yazoo Delta. M. w. Myers 

YEAGER, CHARLES (1923- ), was the first man 
to fly faster than the speed of sound. He accomplished 
this on Oct. 14, 1947, in a Bell X-1 rocket airplane. 
He set another speed record on Dec. 12, 1953, by flying 
2\ times the speed of sound in a Bell X-1 A. Yeager was 
born at Myra, \V.\"a. During World War II, he served 
in England as a fighter pilot. He became commandant 
of the Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards Air 
Force Base, California, in 1962. Robert b. Hotz 

Charles Yeager First Broke the Sound Barrier in 1947. 

Wide World 




YEAR is the time the earth takes to make one com- 
plete revolution around the sun. There are two different 
kinds of years which are used by astronomers. The solar, 
equinoctial, or tropical year is the time between two 
passages of the sun through the vernal equinox, which 
occurs in March. This year is 365 days. 5 hours, 48 
minutes, and 46 seconds long. This year is used for all 
practical and astronomical purposes. It is the basis of 
our common or calendar year. 

The sidereal year is made up of 365 days, 6 hours, 9 
minutes, and 9.5 seconds. This is the time it takes the 
earth to return to the same place in its orbit, with refer- 
ence to the fi-xed stars. The sidereal year is longer than 
the solar year because of the precession of the equinoxes. 
The sidereal year is seldom used except in the calcula- 
tions of astronomers. 

The Calendar Year is only 365 days long, and so we 
have to add an extra day even.' four years to correct the 
diflerence in time between the calendar year and the 
solar year. This fourth year is called leap year, and the 
extra day is February 29. Adding an extra day every 
fourth year makes the average calendar year 1 1 minutes, 
14 seconds too long. So, the day is not added in 
the century years, except in those divisible by 400. 
The years' 1700, 1800, and 1900 have had only 365 
days. The year 2000 will contain 366 days. Thus the 
difference between calendar and solar years will vary 
only one day over a period of several thousand years. 

The lunar year is made up of 12 lunar months. The 
ancient Greeks used this year. It contained 354 days. 

In most Christian nations the calendar year begins on 
January 1. During the Middle Ages, however, most 
European nations considered March I or March 25, 
Annunciation Day, as the first day of the calendar year. 
By 1600, nearly all civilized countries except England 
recognized January I as the first day of the year. Eng- 
land adopted the Gregorian calendar, which recognized 
Januarv 1 as the beginning of the year, on September 
14, 1752. 

The Church Calendar, which is used in the Roman 
Catholic and in most Protestant churches, is regulated 
partly by the solar and partly by the lunar year. This 
causes a difference between the fixed feast days, which 
always fall on the same day every year, and movable 
feasts such as Easter, whose dates vary from year to 
year. The fixed feast days are determined by the solar 
year, and the movable feast days are determined by the 
lunar year. 

In ancient Roman times, before the Julian calendar 
was adopted, the year began on March 1. The Jewish 
year begins near the time of the autumnal equinox, 
around the 22nd of September. The Islamic year, how- 
ever, is based on the changing phases of the moon and 
lasts for 354 days. Therefore, the beginning of the 
Islamic year continually falls earlier in the seasons. 
Thirty Islamic years make up a cycle during which 
there are 1 1 leap years. These leap years occur at irregu- 
lar intervals. Paul Sollenberger 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
A.D. Christian Era Olympiad 

B.C. Equinox Season 

Calendar Leap Year 

YEAR OF CONFUSION. See Calendar (The Julian 
Calendar). 

YEARDLEY, SIR GEORGE. See \ irgima (History). 



YEAST, yeesl. The yeast with which people are most 
famihar is a substance that bakers put in dough to make 
it rise. This yeast contains a mass of tiny, one-celled 
plants czMed yeasts. Yeasts are among the simplest kinds 
of plants. Like mushrooms, they belong to the group of 
plants called fungi. 

Yeasts increase veiy rapidly, and the tiny plants float 
in the air almost everywhere. Some yeasts form new 
plants by a process called budding. A small part of the 
cell wall swells out, and a wall of cellulose soon shuts 
off this new growth from the parent plant. It becomes 
an independent cell, and soon grows other buds. Some- 
times all the cells cling together in chains that later 
break up. Some yeast plants increase simply by dividing 
in two. This process is called /kwo;;. 

What Yeast Does. The French scientist, Caignard de 
la Tour (i 771-1859), discovered in 1857 that yeasts are 
living plants which increase by budding. He also found 
that these plants can act on sugar to change it to alco- 
hol. This important chemical change is part of a process 
of fermentation, which yeasts produce in organic sub- 
stances. It is a result of the way yeast plants get their 
food. While each cell is growing, it produces substances 
known as enzymes, or ferments. Yeasts may form three 
enzymes, diastase, zymase and invertase. Enzymes cause 
fermentation by breaking down starch and sugar in 
solution. Diastase breaks down starch. Invertase causes 
one sugar to form another sugar. Zymase breaks down 
the sugar. Zymase and invertase can work only in the 
right moisture and temperature (about 80° to 85° F.). 

Types of Yeast. Bakers use two forms of commercial 
yeast — the dry and the compressed. Dry veast is made 
by mixing yeast mass and corn meal into cakes, and 
drying them. In this form the yeast cells are inactive, or 
dormant. They will keep indefinitely without spoiling, 
and become active only when they are mixed with the 
right material. Compressed yeast, the other commercial 
form, contains enough starch and moisture to start fer- 
mentation in a short time. It cannot be stored in the 
house very long without spoiling, and must be kept in a 
cool place until it is used. 

Mixing yeast with dough to ferment it is called 
leavening the dough. With dry yeast, the baker must 
first make a sponge. This is a mixture of yeast, flour, 
and water. Sugar may be added to hasten the fermenta- 
tion. The sponge is allowed to stand a few hours — 
sometimes overnight. Then it is mixed with flour and 
more liquid — water, milk, potato water, or whey — to 
make the dough. This dough is kneaded thoroughly, 
covered, and set to "rise." With compressed yeast, the 
baker does not have to prepare a sponge. 



Yeast Makes Bread Dougli Rise. At left, the yeast has just 
been added to the dough. In about two hours it has caused the 
dough to rise, center, to about twice its original size. At the 
right is the baked loaf of crusty, tasty bread. 

Fred Koith. wheat Flour Institute 





Red Star Yeast &amp; Products Co. 

Budding of Yeast Cells to form new plants con be seen in this 
highly magnified picture of the simple, one-celled plants. 



How Yeast Works. Enzymes from the yeast cells 
attack the starch in the flour, and change it to sugar. 
The sugar is then changed to alcohol and carbon dioxide 
gas. The gas bubbles up through the mixture, forming 
the familiar bubbles in bread dough, and making the 
mass light and porous. When the bread is baked, the 
alcohol evaporates and the yeast plants are destroyed. 
If bread is baked properly, it should have no taste of 
alcohol or yeast. Sometimes dough is left to rise too long, 
and the fermentation forms acid. This condition results 
in sour bread. Fermentation by yeast is also important 
in making alcoholic beverages, such as beer and ale. 

Making Yeast. In the days before yeast cakes were 
sold in the stores, housewives made their own yeast. 
They prepared a batter of flour, potato water, salt, and 
sugar, and left it imcovered for several hours. Yeast cells 
in the air furnished the enzymes. This process was uncer- 
tain, because types of yeast not suitable for bread some- 
times lodged in the batter. Some housekeepers still like 
to use this old-fashioned liquid yeast. But they may also 
bu\' prepared yeast and add a small amount to make 
sure of the quality. The mixture will keep a long time 
in a cool place. 

Commercial yeast is prepared by grinding corn and 
rye to a mash and mixing it with filtered water. Sprouted 
barley, or malt, is then added. The malt changes the 
starch in the grain to malt sugar. Next, a culture of the 
bacteria which turn milk sour is added to the mixture. 
The mash is then filtered. The liquid, called ivort, is 
then ready to serve as food for living yeast cells. The 
yeasts increase rapidly in this liquid. When the fermen- 
tation of the wort is violent, the yeast is skimmed oft". It 
is pressed to free it from water. Finally the mass is 
molded, and cut into cakes. Starch is usually added to 
compressed yeast before the pressing, but it must be 
mentioned on the label. Lewis Hanford Tiffanv 

See also Bre.\d; Brewing; Enzyme; Fermentation; 
Gluten. 



461 




William Butler Yeats 



YEATS, WILLIAM BUTLER 

YEATS, )'ato, WILLIAM BUTLER (1865-1939), was an 
Irish poet, dramalisl, and essayist. He was largely re- 
sponsible for the Irish literary revival. Critics generally 
regard him as the greatest poet in English of his time. 
He received the 1923 Nobel prize for literature. 

In 1887, Yeats went to London, where he published 
his first book, a collection of poems called The M'andcr- 
ings of Oisin, in 1889. He quickly became a leader in 
both the nationalistic Irish literary movement and the 
European symbolist movement. He also took an active 
interest in mystical studies. In 1889, he met Maud 
Gonne, the Irish patriot to whom he addressed most 
of his love poems. With Lady Augusta Gregory, he 
founded the Irish Literary 
Theatre in 1899 in Dublin. 
It opened witli his The 
Countess Cathleen (1892). 
This theater became the 
Abbey Theatre in 1904(see 
Abbey The.atre). 

^'eats became a director 
of the Abbey Theatre, and 
wrote many plays for it. 
During this period, his 
poetic manner became 
more precise and humor- 
ous. His dramatic activities 
and other experiences 
helped him achieve the 
dense, tough style of his later poems and plays. 

Yeats was born on June 13, 1865, in Dublin, the son 
of John Butler Yeats, a noted portrait painter. He spent 
his childhood chiefly in Coimty Siigo and in London. 
He returned to Dublin in 1880. After attending art 
school for three years, he turned to a literary career. In 
1917, Yeats married an Englishwoman, Georgie Hyde- 
Lees. He served as a senator in the Irish Free State from 
1922 to 1928. He helped found the Irish Academy of 
Letters in 1932. 

Yeats died at Cap Ferrat, France. Later, his body 
was taken back to Ireland and given a state funeral. 
The best editions of his works include Essays (1924 and 
1937), A Vision (1938), Collected Poems (1951), Collected 
Plays (1953), and Autobicgraphy (1955). Richard Ellm.^nn 
See also Dr.^ma (The Irish Revival); Irish Litera- 
ture (Works irt English). 
YEDO. See Tokyo (History). 

YELLOW is one of the basic colors found in light and 
pigments. It lies about in the middle of the spectrum of 
visible light. It is considered a primary color in pig- 
ments and a complementary color in light. Mixed with 
blue pigment, yellow forms green. Mixed with red pig- 
ment, it makes orange. Because the sun looks yellow, 
some primitive tribes consider the color sacred. Yellow 
is the national color of China. Strong light makes yellow- 
appear more intense, although it dims most other colors. 
Early peoples made yellow dye from saffron in the cro- 
cus plant. Artists often use gamboge yellow, made from 
gum resin. 

See also Color. 

YELLOW DAISY. See Black-Eyed Susan. 
YELLOW-DOG CONTRACTS, often called ironclads, 
are agreements between employers and employees in 



which workers promise not to join or assist a union or 
take part in any group action against the employer. 
Such a contract, backed by court injunctions, was a 
device that employers used to oppose union organi- 
zation in their plants. 

The Norris-LaGuardia Act of 1 932 made yellow-dog 
contracts illegal. The National Labor Relations Act of 
1935 gave employees the right to join unions of their 

choice. H. G. Heneman, Jr. 

YELLOW FEVER is a virus disease carried by certain 
mosquitoes. Fhe virus damages the liver in man. Be- 
cause of this damage, the liver cannot function properly 
and yellow bile pigments gather in the skin. These pig- 
ments make the victim's skin look yellow, giving the 
disease its name. 

Cause. In 1927. Johannes Bauer, a Swedish research 
physician, proved that yellow fever is caused by a 
virus. Fhe yellow fever virus is usually carried from 
one person to another by the Aedes aegyptl mosquito 
(see NIosQUiTO [Yellow Fever and Dengue)). Some mon- 
keys may also be hosts for the virus. The inosquito 
takes up the virus when it bites an infected person or 
monkey. The microorganism develops rapidly in the 
body of the mosc|uito. .\fter about 1 2 days, the bite of 
the mosquito introduces enough germs into the person 
bitten to produce yellow fever. Once a mosquito is in- 
fected with the yellow fever virus, it can transmit the 
disease as long as it lives. 

In severe cases, the attack of yellow fever begins 
about three to six days after the mosquito bites the per- 
son. Fhe infected person's temperature rises rapidly. He 
becomes restless and his bones ache severely, .•\bout the 
third day, his temperature drops and his skin begins to 
look yellow. But the drop in temperature lasts only 
about two or three days. Aher that time the person be- 
comes more violently ill than before. .Sometimes coma 
develops (see Coma). Many persons who have this 
severe form of yellow fever die. But those who recover 
develojj a lifelong immunity to the disease. 

Prevention. Yellow fever is widespread throughout 
Central .America, parts of South America, Africa, and 
some tropical islands. It can be prevented by using a 
vaccine developed by Max Theiler in 1937. However, 
the best control is to kill the mosquito. 

The conrjuest of yellow fever is one of the great ac- 
coinplishments of modern medicine. The work of Carlos 
Finlay in 1881 and 1882 laid the groundwork for study- 
ing the mosquito in connection with the disease. Walter 
Reed of the U.S. Army Yellow Fever Board identified 
the genn and demonstrated the carrier role of the mos- 
quito. He worked in Havana from 1900 to 1901. Wil- 
liam Gorgas, also of the L'.S. .Arm\', and workers from 
the Rockefeller Foundation pioneered the mosquito 
control measures that eliminated the disease as a major 
health menace in the Panama Canal Zone (see Panama 
Canal [N'ictory Over Disease]). In 1964, the United 
States began a SI 00,000,000 program to eliminate the 
Aedes moscjuito within five to seven years. Paul s. Rhoads 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Finlay, Carlos Juan Reed, Walter 

Gorgas, William C. Tennessee (Reconstruction) 

Jaundice Theiler, Max 

YELLOW FLAG. See Quarantine. 
YELLOW GOLD. See Alloy (Cosdy and Ornamental 
Alloys). 



462 




Gayle Plckwell 

Queen Yellow Jacket 



YELLOW JACKET is a small wasp with black and 
\'ellow stripes. Yellow jackets belong to the group called 
the social wasps, and are relatives of the hornets. Yellow 
jackets, like hornets, make their nests of paper. They 
form the paper by chewing up old wood and plant 
fibers. Yellow jackets produce a finer paper than hornets. 
The nests have several stories of cells inside a thick paper 
covering. There are three classes among these wasps. 
They are the workers, queens, and the males, or drones. 
In this respect, the wasps 
resemble the bees. 

Yellow jackets sometimes 
hang their nests from trees 
or bushes. Sometimes they 
build them in the ground, 
in holes dug by gophers or 
field mice. .Sometimes they 
build nests in the hollows 
of slumps or stone fences. 
The habits and life his- 
tory of yellow jackets are 
like those of the larger 
wasps. They cat the nectar 
and juices of ripe fruit, and 
do some damage to or- 
chards and market gardens. 
But they fully make up for 
this damage by destroying houseflies, stable flies, 
caterpillars, and other harmful insects. 

Scientific Classification. Yellow jackets are in the family 
Vespidae. The common yellow jacket is genus Vespida, 
species W pfiinsylvanica. C\rl d. Dl'ncan 

YELLOW JASMINE. See Gelsemium. 

YELLOW JOURNALISM. See Journalism (Ethics and 
Traditions); Ne\vsp.\per (Consolidation and Expan- 
sion); OuTCAULT, Richard Felton. 

YELLOW PUCCOON. See Goldenseal. 

YELLOW RACE. See Races of Man. 

YELLOW RIVER. .See Hwang Ho. 

YELLOW SEA is an arm of the Pacific Ocean extend- 
ing inland for about 400 miles between the east coast 
of China and Korea. The waters along the banks here 
arc a yellow, muddy color, and the Chinese have named 
this part of the ocean the Hwang Hat (Yellow Sea). 
The Hwang Hai gets its color from deposits of yellow 
earth {hwang-tu) brought down to the sea by the 
Hwang and Yangtze rivers. For location, see China 
(color map). 

The sea is about 400 miles wide at its widest point, 
and about 300 feet deep in its deepest part. It covers a 
total area of 480,000 square miles. 

.Shanghai lies on the Yellow Sea, southeast of the 
mouth of the Yangtze. W'eihaiwei, a former British 
possession, is on the Chinese coast farther north. Port 
Arthur, of Russo-Japanese War fame, is at the southern 
end of the peninsula which separates the Yellow .Sea 
from the Gulf of Korea at the north. 

The Korea Strait connects the Yellow .Sea with the 
Sea of Japan. At the north, the Yellow Sea forms Lai- 
chow Bay, the Gulf of Chihli (Pohai), the Gulf of 
Liaotung, and Korea Bay. bostwick h. Ketchum 

YELLOW TREFOIL. See Shamrock. 

YELLOWHAMMER is the popular name of two North 
American birds, the yellow-shafted flicker and the great 
crested flycatcher . The yellow-shafted flicker is a brown 



YELLOWS 

woodpecker with an ashy-gray head (see Flicker). It 
ranges from the northernmost forests of Canada to 
southern Illinois and North Carolina. The yellow- 
shafted flicker sjiends much of the time on the ground, 
searching for ants. The great crested flycatcher ranges 
from South Carolina to Central .Xmerica. It is about 
85 inches long, and is olive brown with yellow under- 
neath. 

Scientific Classification. The yellow-shafted flicker 
belongs to the family Picidae. It is genus Colaptes, species 
C. auratus. The great crested flycatcher belongs to the 
family Tyrannidae. It is classiiied as Myinrchus crini- 
tus. Leon A. Hausman 

See also Bird (color picture. Birds That Help Us). 

YELLOWHAMMER STATE. See Alabama. 

YELLOWKNIFE (pop. 3,141; alt. 570 ft.) is a mining 
center and the largest town in Canada's Northwest Ter- 
ritories. It lies on the shores of Yellowknife Bay, a pro- 
jection at the northern end of Great Slave Lake. .See 
Northwest Territories (map). Industries include 
gold mining, prospecting, transportation, and tourism. 
Yellowknife was founded in the mid-1930's. 

YELLOWLEGS is the name of two kinds of shore birds. 
They have black and white markings and long yellow 
legs. They live along shores and marshes during their 
flight north in the spring. They nest in northern North 
America. In the winter, they fly as far south as southern 
Chile, in .South America. The two kinds of yellowlegs 
differ only in size. The greater yellowlegs averages 15 
inches in length, while the lesser averages a little over 
10 inches. Yellowlegs lay four buff or tan eggs. They 
have a flutelike whistle that hunters imitated to entice 
them down to decoys. Yellowlegs became rare birds by 
too much hunting, but federal laws protect them now, 
and they are again becoming common. 

Scientific Classification. Yellowlegs belong to the family 
Scolopacidae. The greater is genus Tolariiis, species T. mela- 
noleucus; the lesser is T. ftavipes. Alfred m. bailey 

See also Bird (color picture. Water Birds). 

YELLOWS is a name for jaundice in dogs, sheep, and 
other animals. Jaundice is due to an improper flow of 
bile. Two common forms occur in dogs, one due to an 
abiTipt stoppage by gallstones, the other to inflamma- 
tion and hardening of the liver, which is often seen after 
distemper. The mucous membrane, skin, and whites of 
the eyes turn yellow. Other symptoms are vomiting, 
constipation, and green or deep yellow urine. Treat- 
ment should begin by feeding a scant diet free from fat. 
Baking soda taken by mouth or as an enema acts as a 
laxative to help remove the obstruction. Calomel, 
brandy, and sour milk are sometimes used to treat 
yellows, but exert little specific action. 

An infectious form of yellows is sometimes called ca- 
nine typhus. It is caused by spirochetes, which are 
thought to be carried by rats. Besides the yellow color, 
the dog has a high fever, bleeding gums, and poor ap- 
petite. It may vomit and show bloody bowel discharges. 
A serum and a vaccine for this disease are sometimes 
useful. In fighting the disease it is important to control 
rats, because the disease is carried from rats by ticks. 
The living quarters of infected dogs should also be dis&lt;- 
infected to destroy the ticks. R. c. klussendorf 

See also Bile; Jaundice. 



463 





Ansel Adams, courtesy U.S. Dept. of Interior 

Old Faithful Geyser spouts a silvery cascade of steaming water 
high into the air — a beautiful and inspiring sight. 



YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK. More than 
1 ,250,000 visitors each year agree that Yellowstone Na- 
tional Park is one of the world's wonderlands. It was 
established in 1872 and was the first national park in the 
United States. The park is about two thirds as large as 
Connecticut. It occupies 3,471.51 square miles in the 
northwestern corner of Wyoming and overlaps into 
Montana and Idaho. It is the largest of the national 
parks. 

Yellowstone Park lies on a plateau about 8,000 feet 
above sea level. The Snowy Mountains are on the north, 
the snow-capped peaks of the Absarokas are on the east, 
the Tetons are on the south, and the Gallatin range lies 
to the west and north. The highest mountain entirely 
within the park is Electric Peak (i 1,155 fi^et)- 

Great forests of lodgepole pine, spruce, and Douglas 
fir cover about four fifths of the park's area. Hayden 
and Lamar valleys are covered by thick growths of 
grass and flowers during the short suiiuner in this re- 
gion. The ground in the geyser region of the park is a 
light gray because it is covered by a thin layer of silica 
called the formation. 

' Yellowstone is the oldest large wildlife preserve in 
the United States. Hunting is forbidden in the park. 
The forests and valleys support a number of large ani- 



mals, including elk, deer, antelope, mountain sheep, 
buffalo, moose, and grizzly bear. Most of these animals 
have lost their fear of man after many years of protec- 
tion. The rivers and lakes are the homes of waterfowl, 
and the forests shelter many birds and small animals. 
New stocks are added each year to the great numbers of 
fish in the lakes and streams. Fishing is allowed under 
government regulations. The park is famous for some 
of the best fishing in the west. The fish are mosdy trout, 
chiefly cutthroat or black-spotted, rainbow, Loch Leven, 
and eastern brook trout. Many tourists travel on horse- 
back in order to fish in the wilderness areas. 

The Wonders of the Park 

No other place in the world of the same size has as 
many natural wonders as Yellowstone National Park. 
Geysers, hot springs, sparkling lakes and rivers, deep 
gorges, and high cataracts are among the many attrac- 
tions. The beautiful coloring of Yellowstone Canyon 
includes great splashes of yellow, red, white, orange, and 
brown set against the green of the surrounding forests 
and the blue of the sky. 

Geysers. There are si,x main geyser areas or basins in 
the park. Four of these, the Norris, the Upper, the Mid- 
way, and the Lower basins, are along the route usually 
taken by tourists. The Upper Basin is a valley about a 
mile and a half long and half a mile across. Tourists 
enjoy visiting the large geysers along the banks of the 
Firehole River. See Geyser. 

Over 200 active geysers in the park make it the great- 
est geyser region in the world. The geysers differ widely 
in size and the volume of water and steam they spout. 
The smallest are tiny fountains which shoot streams of 
water four or five feet into the air. The largest throw 
columns of water as high as 200 feet, and flow for two 
to three hours. The Giantess Geyser has been known to 
spout water at irregular intervals for 36 hours. 

Old Faithful is the best-known of the geysers. It is not 
the largest, but it has become famous because it is so 
regular in its activity. Since it was first discovered in 
1870, it has spouted on an average of about every 65 
minutes, summer and winter. It shoots silvery cascades 
1 20 to 1 70 feet in the air, and each display lasts about 
four minutes. In this time the geyser sends up about 
10,000 gallons of water at a temperature of about 200° 
F. Other geysers of special interest are the Beehive, the 
Casde, the Grotto, the Riverside, the Giant, the Grand, 
the Daisy, and the Lion. 

The Giant Geyser is known as the largest in the park. 
It throws its water up to 1 75 feet. For a time the Im- 
perial Geyser, which first spouted in 1928, threw out 
a greater amount of water than the Giant. But later it 
died out and it is now only a great pool. The Imperial 
was regarded as one of the most spectacular geysers ever 
known in Yellowstone, except the Excelsior, which has 
not been known to empt since 1888. The crater of the 
Imperial was a great dish, 100 to 120 feet across and 
about eight feet deep. It hurled water in all directions 
in great explosive outbursts. For over a year it was 
throwing water as high as 50 to 95 feet for periods of 
four or five hours at a time. 

Geyser waters contain solutions of silica. This is left, 
a litUe at a time around the walls of the geyser's crater. 
Through the years this silica deposit has built beautiful 
mounds of many colors around the craters. The Bee- 



464 



hi\'e, the Castle, and the Grotto geysers take their names 
from the form of their craters. The crater of the Oblong 
geyser is a rainbow of delicate tints. It is one of the 
most colorful sights in the park. 

Hot Springs. There are more than 3.000 hot springs 
in \"ello\vstone Park. The floors of the geyser basins are 
covered with these springs. The temperature of the 
spring waters ranges from ii6°F. to boiling (2i2°F.). 
Many of them actually boil, and others bubble like 
boiling water because of escaping gas. The hot springs 
and ge\'sers of Yellowstone National Park produce 
enough heat to melt three tons of ice evers' second. 

The Mammoth Hot .Springs. fi\e miles from Gardi- 
ner. Mont., are the most famous of all the rock-deposit- 
ing springs. The hot waters contain limestone which is 
deposited upon the surface over which the water flows. 
These springs ha\e built up a series of terraces which 
shape up in the form of a small mountain. They co\er 
2,000 acres and reach as high as 300 feet. The terraces 
have a rare beauty because of their delicate structure 
and different colors. Some are bright yellow, some are 
brown, and others are the color of terra cotta. The colors 
are largely the result of plant life, called algae, in the 
water. The water is crystal clear, and the reflection from 
the bottom of the spring basins gives it a delicate blue 
tint. Many of the hot springs in the geyser basins are 
interesting because of their beautiful colors. Grand 
Prismatic Spring in the Midway Geyser Basin is a pond 
of boiling water whose surface reflects all the colors of 
the rainbow. Morning Glory Spring is a picture of the 
flower it is named for. Emerald Spring was named for 
its rich green coloring. 

Lakes and Rivers. The Continental Divide passes 
through Yellowstone Park in a jagged line running from 
the southeast to the west boundar\'. The region south 
and west of the Divide makes up less than one fourth 
of the park. It is drained b)- die Snake Ri\er into the 
Columbia. The Gibbon and the Firehole rivers join to 
form the Madison. This river and the Gallatin drain 
the western part of the park into the Missouri Ri\er. 
The eastern part is drained into the Missouri by the 
Yellowstone River and its branches. All these rivers are 
clear and cold, and have beautiful falls and rapids. See 
Dr^iDE; Yellowstone River. 

Yellowstone Lake is the most important body of water 

A Hot Spring in Yellowstone furnishes this tourist a convenient 
place to cook lunch. Eis&lt;,„stae,]i. tin 




■it •' i^ ■^♦-T' ^^ 




J E H.-iyii,^, courtesy U.S. Dept. of Interior 

Deer Groze^ friendly and unafraid, in the "front yard" of the 
headquarters orea of Yellowstone National Park. 

in the park. It covers about 139 square miles, is about 
300 feet deep, and lies 7,731 feet above sea level. If 
Electric Mountain, the highest of the park's mountains, 
could be set in Yellowstone Lake with its base at sea 
level, its peak would be only about 3.500 feet above the 
surface of the lake. Yellowstone Lake is one of the high- 
est bodies of water of its size in the world. Only Lake 
Titicaca in Peru, comparable in size, is higher. The 
water is clear and cold, and the lake abounds in fish. 
The cones of a number of hot springs rise above the 
surface of the lake near the western shore. Shoshone, 
Lewis, and Heart lakes lie south of the Continental Di- 
vide. Beach and Dr\ad lakes lie west of Yellowstone 
Lake, and a number of smaller lakes northeast of it. 

The Falls and Canyons of the Yellowstone. Many 
of the dozens of waterfalls in the park are ver\' beautiful. 
Most important and beautiful of them are the Firehole 
Falls of the Firehole River. 40 feet high; Gibbon Falls 
and the Kepler Cascade, each 80 feet high; Osprey 
Falls, 150 feet; Tower Falls, 132 feet; and the Lower 
Falls of the ^'ellowstone, 308 feet high. The L'pper Falls 
of the Yellowstone are 109 feet high. The channel nar- 
rows to a width of 80 feet a short distance farther on, 
and here the river makes another plunge of 308 feet. In 
its leap the water is dashed into spra\' which completely 
hides the lower part of the fall. The narrow gorge gi\-es 
full effect to the great height of the fall, and the roar 
of the water is deafening. Most beautiful of all the won- 
ders of Yellowstone Park is probably the Yellowstone 
Canyon, a gorge twenty-four miles long and i ,200 feet 
deep in places. This scene has been photographed, 
painted by artists, and written about by many writers. 
But to those who have seen it, no picture or any amount 
of glowing words can do justice to the beauty of the 
canyon. 

Other Points of Interest in Yellowstone National 
Park include Golden Gate Canyon and the canyons of 
the Gardiner and the Gibbon ri\ers. The Fountain 
Paint Pot is a pool of boiling clay of different colors. 
Mud Geyser, in Hayden N'alley. is ven.- different from 
the beautiful scenery- around it. Obsidian Cliff is a 



465 



YELLOWSTONE RIVER 

mountain of glass 165 feet high. Roaring Mountain is 
a hill near Norris Geyser Basin. Jets of steam shoot from 
its sides. Petrified forests lie in the northeastern and 
northwestern sections of the park. 

History and Administration 

John Colter, a member of the Lewis and Clark Expe- 
dition, is believed to have been the first white man in 
the Yellowstone area. He explored the region in the 
early 1800's. James Bridger, another western explorer, 
visited the area around 1830. The explorers' reports of 
geysers, hot springs, and other natural attractions 
stirred up interest in this region. But many people did 
not believe the stories of the natural wonders. 

The Washburn Expedition of 1870 verified early 
reports of the region. During the expedition, the mem- 
bers decided to start a national campaign, urging that 
the area become a national park. Congress established 
Yellowstone Park in 1872 as "a national park and a 
pleasuring ground." The park is managed by the 
National Park Service of the United States Department 
of the Interior. It is under the direction of the superin- 
tendent, who lives in the administration headquarters at 
Mammoth Hot Springs. Park rangers patrol the park 
all year to protect the scenery and the wildlife. Everyone 
entering the park must register any firearms, and leave 
them at the entrance or have them sealed. 

In 1956, the government announced a program of 
park improvement. The program provided for the con- 
struction of recreational and housing accommodations 
and for the removal of barriers to the park's views. Can- 
yon Village, a modern housing project built under the 
program, opened in 1957. In 1959, a series of earth- 
quakes in the Yellowstone area killed 28 persons and 
changed some of the park's land features, shifting about 
43,000,000 tons of earth. More than 100 springs with- 
out previous geyser activity erupted, and the water tem- 
perature of some of them rose considerably. 

How to See the Park 

Excellent roads lead from the park entrances to all 
the points of interest. The five entrances are at Gardiner 
on the north, Cody on the east. Snake River on the 
south. West Yellowstone on the west, and Cooke on 
the northeast. Automobiles were allowed in the park 
lor the first time in 1915. By 1917, they had taken the 
place of horses for most transportation. There are hotels 
at Mammoth Hot Springs, at Upper Geyser Basin, at 
the foot of Yellowstone Lake, and near the Grand Can- 
yon. Tourist cabins, lodges, and cafeterias are also at 
main points of interest. Buses run into the park and 
between points of interest. A 1 50-mile tour takes two 
and a half days. About 1,300,000 persons tour the 
park in their own cars during each vacation season. 
Almost a third of them camp along the way. 

More than nine-tenths of Yellowstone is wilderness. 
These wilderness regions can be reached only on foot or 
on horseback. Food supplies must be carried on trips to 
many parts of the park. Edmund B. Rogers 

For additional information and pictures, see Wy- 
oming. 

YELLOWSTONE RIVER rises near the Continental 
Divide in northwestern Wyoming and Hows north into 

466 



Yellowstone National Park. For location, see Wyoming 
(physical map). There it forms Yellowstone Lake, which 
covers 150 square miles at an elevation of 7,731 feet. 
The lake is the largest high-elevation lake in North 
America. North of the lake, the river plunges 109 feet 
over its upper falls and 308 feet over its lower falls into 
Yellowstone Canyon. Then it Hows northeast across the 
Cireat Plains of Montana, where it is used for irrigation. 
The Yellowstone flows a total distance of 671 miles and 
joins the Missouri River on the Montana-North Dakota 

Ime. John H. Garland 

YELLOWTAIL is the name for three kinds of saltwater 
fish. One yellowtail is also called the amber jack and 
white salmon. The second is a snapper, and the third 
is sometimes called the silver perch. See also Amber 
J.^ck; Fishing (table, Game-Fishing World Records); 
Perch; Snapper. 

YELLOWTHROAT is a common wood warbler that 
lives in North America. Yellowthroats grow about the 
size of a small wren. They live in wet grassy or marshy 
areas, where they can hide among the tall reeds. They 
have olive-green backs, and bright orange-yellow 
throats. The male has a black mask on its face, with a 
white border above it. The yellowthroat builds its nest 
on or near the ground. The female usually lays four eggs, 
which are white with small brown and black spots. 

Scientists recognize 12 races (subspecies) of the 
yellowthroat. These groups differ slightly in color and 
size. Yellowthroats breed within an area stretching 
from Ontario and southeastern Alaska south to Mexico. 
Fhey generally spend the winter in an area extending 
from the Gulf States into Central America. 

Be/dini;'s yellowthroat is slightly larger, with solid yel- 
low underparts and a yellow border on the black mask 
of the male. It lives in Baja California, Mexico. 

Scientific Classification. Yellowthroats belong to the 
family I'arulidae. The migrating yellowthroat is genus 
Geothlypis, species G. trichas. Belding's yellowthroat is 
G. bfldingt. George E. Hudson 

See also Warbler. 




YEMEN, VEM un. is a republic in the southwestern 
corner of the Arabian Peninsula. Yemen covers about 
75.290 square miles and has about 5,000,000 people, 
mostly Moslems. Yemen is bordered b&gt;- the British Pro- 
tectorate of .South Arabia on the south and .Saudi Ara- 
bia on the east and north. \'emen's coastline stretches 
for 300 miles along the Red Sea. The Tihamn. a hot, 
humid coastal plain, extends inland 20 to 50 miles. 

Less than 10 inches of rain falls annually on the 
coastal plain. Behind the coastal plain, barren foothills 
give way to rugged mountains. These moimtains rise 
over 10,000 feet above sea level in the interior of Yemen. 
They are the highest in the Arabian Peninsula. 

A broad central valley lies high in the moimtainous 
interior. Its altitude of 7,000 feet above sea level makes 
it cooler than the coastal plain. The valley receives 10 
to 12 inches ol' rain a year, more than the rest of the 
Arabian Peninsula. Average temperatures in Yemen 
range from 60°F. in January to 80°F. in July. 

§an'a' (pop. 89,000) is the capital of Yemen and an 
ancient trading center. Al Hudaydah (pop. 40,000) is a 
port on the Red Sea. Other cities include ija'dah 
(25,000); Ibb (25,000); Ta'izz (25,000); -Amran (20,000); 
Dhamar (20,000); Yarim (20,000); Al Mukha ((3,000); 
and Al Luljayyah (5,000). 

Agriculture and grazing are the chief occupations 
of the people. Grazing animals include camels, donkeys, 
horses, and sheep. Coffee is the principal crop of 
Yemen. The republic is famous for its Mocha coffee. 
Yemen also raises wheat, barley, and qat, a woody 
shrub with narcotic-bearing leaves. Industries in the 
towns of Yemen include the manufacture of soap, 
harnesses and saddles, and some glassware and jewelr)'. 

Long before the time of Christ, an important inland 
trading route passed through Yemen. The caravans car- 
ried spices, frankincense, and pearls. At that time, the 
people of Yemen were active traders. Many ruins of 
cities, castles, temples, and dams tell of ancient flourish- 
Tribesmen and Farmers in Southern Yemen do most of 
their trading at Ta'izz, center of a coffee-growing region. 





Assab 
ETHIOPIA 



•'SOMALILAHD 



Gulf of 



10 20 30 40 50 , 
MILES I I I I I 1 I 4io 



hy Ranri McNally for WORI-D BOOK 

ing civilizations. After the time of Christ, internal fric- 
tion, war with Abyssinia (now Ethiopia), and the burst- 
ing of a great dam at Marib in the 500's ended pros- 
perity. Yemen practically disappeared from history 
until the 1800's. It was part of the Ottoman Empire 
from 1849 to 1918. Yemen became a member of the 
Arab League when it was formed in 1945. In 1951, 
Yemen established diplomatic relations with Great 
Britain and permitted the first foreign diplomat to come 
to §an"a'. In 1958, it joined the United Arab Republic 
to form the United Arab States. Yemen and the L'.-^.R. 
shared a single armed force and defense policy until the 
United Arab States was dissolved in December, 1961. 

Y'emen became a republic in 1962. Lentil then, the 
imam (king) had ruled the kingdom in both political and 
religious affairs. But in .September, 1962, militai7 forces 
overthrew Imam Mohammed al-Badr and named 
Brigadier General Abdullah al-Salai premier. He be- 
came the country's first president in October, 1962. 
A pennanent constitution was adopted in April, 1964. 

The royalist forces led by the imam tried to re- 
gain conuol of the government. Saudi Arabia and 
Jordan sent help to the imam, and Egypt aided the 
republicans. The United Nations tried in vain to 
end the fighting. A truce was finally declared in 
November, 1964, in an attempt to elect a coalition 
governiTient. The imam annoimced he would recognize 
a popularly elected government if Egyptian troops 
left the covmtn'. But lighting broke out again and con- 
tinued in 1965. Douglas D. Crary 

See also Arab League; Flag (color picture. Flags of 
Asia); .'jan'.^'; United Arab Republic. 



467 



YEN 

YEN is the chief unit of Japanese money. It lias five 
values, each in a diflferent metal. They are the 100 yen 
(silver), 50 yen (nickel), 10 yen (bronze), 5 yen (brass), 
and 1 yen (aluminum). The sen and the riti, smaller 




Chase Manhattan Bank Money Museum 

Face/ left, and Reverse Side of the Yen 

denominations of the yen, were removed from circu- 
lation in 1954. But they are still used as units for 
calculation. For the value of the yen^ see Money 

(table). Lewis M. Reagan 

YEN, JAMES YANG CH'U (1894- ), a Chinese 
educator, headed the mass education movement in 
China. The aims of the movement were to fight illiter- 
acy, poverty, disease, and misgovernment. As a YMCA 
worker in France during World War I, Yen taught 
coolies of the Chinese Labor Corps to read and write, 
and became interested in educating his people. He 
\vrote readere for his students, and recruited Chinese 
scholars to organize study groups throughout China. 
"V'en was born in .Szechwan province, China, the son of 
an old family of scholars. He was graduated from Vale 
Univei-sity in 1918, and later received a master's degree 
from Princeton University. During World War II, he 
was an adviser to Chiang Kai-shek. John s. Brubacher 

YENISEY RIVER, i£.v uh SAl', drains an area of 
more than 1,000,000 square miles in Siberia. The 
Yenisey travels about 2,360 miles from its origin in the 
Sayan Mountains of southern Siberia to its mouth on 
the Arctic coast. 

After the Yenisey leaves the Sayan Mountains, it 
flows in a general northerly direction. It enters the Arc- 
tic Ocean through a great divided mouth, or estuary, 
about 200 miles east of the Bay of Ob. Ocean steamers 
regularly go 400 miles up the river to Igarka, a lumber port. 

In the early 1960's, the Russian government built a 
large hydroelectric station near Krasnoyarsk, where the 
Trans-Siberian railroad crosses the Yenisey River. 
Timber, gold, coal, and graphite are taken along the 
Yenisey's banks. Theodore Shabad 

See also River (color picture, Longest Rivers). 

YEOMAN, 10 mun, was a retainer, or dependent of 
a feudal lord in early England. In the 1400"s, the name 
yeomen came to mean English foresters, or small free- 
holders on a feudal manor. Later the yeomen became 
an independent class of small landowners and farmers. 
They \vere famous for their sturdiness and patriotism. 
Yeomen formed their own volunteer cavalr)' groups, 
called yeomanry, after 1761. 

The' Yeomen of the Guard form a bodyguard to the 
king or queen of Great Britain. King Henry \II fii'st 



organized this group in 1485. Today the Yeomen still 
serve as royal bod\guards on formal occasions. The 
officers wear contemporaiy uniforms, but the men wear 
colorful costumes and carry weapons that date back to 
the Tudor period. Their tunics are red and have blue 
and gold facings, and they wear red knee breeches and 
flat-topped hats. Years ago, the Yeomen Warders of 
the Tower of London were nicknamed "beefeaters." 
This is an old term. It may have started in Tudor days, 
when servants ate their masters' beef in large quan- 
tities. 

An appointment to the Yeomen of the Guard is 
purely honorary. Officers and enlisted men for the 
Guard are chosen from Great Britain's regular armed 
forces. But the job no longer calls for fighting ability 
as a basic requirement. 

In the L'nitcd States Navy, petty officers performing 
clerical work have the rating of Teaman. Their insignia 
show sets of crossed quills. Robert s. Hoyt 

See also London (picture, Beefeaters); Tov\^r of 

LONDO.N'. 

YERBA MATE. See Mate. 

YEREVAN, r&lt;/i reh r.4//.V (pop. 578.000; alt. 3,280 
ft.), capital of the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
lies at the foot of Mount Ararat in southwestern Russia. 
Industries include aluminum, chemical, machinery, 
and food-processing plants. Yerevan has several uni- 
versities and museums. It was founded in the 600's. 
For location, see Rissi.^ (color map). 

YERKES, ROBERT MEARNS (1876-1956). an Ameri- 
can psychologist, became best known for his studies of 
the behavior of apes. His most important work is The 
Great Apes (1929). He energetically promoted a center 
for the biological and psychological study of primates, 
the Yerkes Laboratories for Primate Biology at Orange 
Park, Fla. Yerkes was born in Breadysville, Pa. During 
World War I, he promoted the development and ad- 
ministering of intelligence tests to make better use of 
American man power. 

YERKES OBSERVATORY is the astronomical depart- 
ment of the University of Chicago. The obsei-valoiy is 
located 76 iniles north of Chicago, at Williams Bay on 
Lake Geneva in Wisconsin. It has the largest refracting 
telescope in the world, with a lens 40 inches across and 
weighing 760 pounds. The telescope has a maximum 
magnifying power of 4,000 diameters. It is adjusted by 
delicate electrical devices, and the floor below it may 
be raised or lowered so the observer can use the eye- 
piece when the instrument is placed at an angle. A 
dome 90 feet in diameter accommodates the 63-foot- 
long telescope, which is increased to about 69 feet in 
length when its attachments are added. 

Yerkes Observatory is famous for work done there on 
the distances of the stars by Frank Schlesinger, for 
advances in solar physics made by its first director, 
G. E. Hale, and for studies of stellar spectra. E. E. Bar- 
nard and F. E. Ross made two magnificent atlases of 
the Milky Way there. The observatory was founded 
by G. E. Hale with a large donation made by the 
Chicago businessman, Charies T. Yerkes (1837-1905). 
Since 1932 the Yerkes Observatory has been connected 
with the W. J. McDonald Observatory of the Univer- 
sity of Texas at Fort Davis, Texas. 

See also H.\i-E, George E. 

YERMAK. See Siberia (History). 



Otto Struve 



468 



YESHIVA UNIVERSITY is a private school in New 
York City. Founded in 1886, it was tlie first university 
in the United States under Jewish auspices. Some of its 
divisions are for women, some for men, and some are 
coeducational. Divisions include liberal arts, teachers 
institutes, medicine, mathematics, education, social 
work, a theological seminary, a cantorial training 
institute, and an Israel institute. For enrollment, see 
Uniyersities and Colleges (table). sam hartstei.m 

YESLER, HENRY. See Seattle (History). 

YETI. See Abominable Snowman. 

YEW is the name of a group of evergreen trees and 
shrubs. The leaves of yews are flat, pointed needles, 
dark green on top and pale green beneath. They spread 
apart in two rows along the stem. The bark is reddish 
brown and scaly. Yews bear scarlet berries. The trunk 
of the yew may grow large, and yew trees sometimes 
live and flourish for hundreds of years. 

The English yew grows in Europe, Asia, and Africa. 
There are a great many yews near the English Channel, 
where the chalky soil seems to further their growth. The 
famous English archers who defeated the F'rench knights 
during the wars of the Middle Ages used longbows made 
of yew wood. Yew trees often grew in English church- 
yards. Branches of the trees sei"ved as funeral decorations, 
and were twined into wreaths for the heads of mourners. 
For this reason, the yew often symbolizes sadness. 

The yew has a tough elastic wood, and a grain almost 
as beautiful as that of mahogany. Today, yew is polished 
and made into tables. The heartwood of the yew has an 
orange-red color. 

Several different kinds of yews grow in America. One 
is the tall western, or Pacific, yew. The wood of this tree 
is valued for use in cabinetwork and for canoe paddles. 
The Japanese yew grows more in the form of a shrub. 
The American yew, or ground hemlock, is a low, straggling 
shrub. People often use the branches of the American 
yew for Christmas decorations. 

Scientific Classification. The yews belong to the yew 
family, Taxaceae. The English yew is classified as genus 
Tnxus, species T. baccala; the western yew is T. brevifolia; 
the Japanese yew is T. cuspidala; and the American yew 
is T. canadensis, John t. Buchholz 

.See also Cone-Bearing Trees. 

The Shrublike Japanese Yew, \efl, grows well in rocky soil 
dork green throughout the year. The yew bears attractive sccrl 




YODEL 

YGGDRASIL, IG driih sil, was the tree of life, death, 
and destiny in Norse mythology. It was sometimes 
called the tree of the world. Yggdrasil supposedly sprang 
up from the body of Yinir, the frost giant. 

The trunk of the tree supported the earth. Four stags, 
representing the winds, kept nibbling at its branches. 
Its three main roots bound together the earth, heaven, 
and the underworld. Yggdrasil's roots were fed by 
springs. One was the spring of wisdom, in the region of 
the giants. Another was the \vell of the three .Korns 
(goddesses of destiny). The third was down deep in 
.Niflheim, the underworld. Here a dragon kept gnawing 
at the root. At the top of Yggdrasil sat a wise eagle. 
.\ squirrel kept running from the eagle to the dragon 
below, forever causing conflict between the two. Thus 
it was believed that Yggdrasil would be gradually 

destroved. Arthur M. Selvi 

YIDDISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE. Millions 
of Jews throughout the world speak and write in the 
Yiddish language. Yiddish is about a thousand years 
old. It grew from a German dialect of the Middle .'Kges, 
and includes elements from Hebrew and Aramaic; Ro- 
mance languages, such as French and Italian; and 
Slavic languages, such as Polish and Russian. Yiddish 
folklore is rich in songs, tales, and proverbs. 

Early Yiddish literature was made up mainly of long 
stories, poems, and religious writings. The literature de- 
clined in the early I800"s, but was revived in the !860's 
in a new movement that began in eastern Europe. 
Leaders included the novelist Mendele Moicher Sforim 
(Mendele the Bookseller, 1836-1917), the poet and 
short-story writer Isaac Loeb Peretz (1851-1915), and 
the humorist Sholom Aleichem (Solomon Rabinowitz, 
1859-1916). Since then, hundreds of prose writers, dra- 
matists, and poets have contributed to Yiddish litera- 
ture. See also Sholom Aleichem. Uriel weinreigh 

YMCA. See Young Men's Christian Association. 

YMHA. See Young Men's Hebrew .'Association. 

YMIR. See Mythology (Myths Concerning the 
Creation of the World). 

YO-YO is a kind of grooved top attached to a per- 
son's finger by a loop at the end of a string. The oppo- 
site end of the string is at- 
The foliage, right, remains a rich j^^.^^.^ j^jj^^ jj^g ,^^ ^f 

let berries in autumn. , t^ . 

the yo-yo. By maneuvering 

the string, the operator can 
make the yo-yo run up and 
dowir the string. An ac- 
complished operator can 
make the yo-yo perform 
many intricate loops. 
YODEL is a warbling type 
.,N of singing which is most 
~.S&gt; commonly heard among 
the .'Mpine mountaineers of 
Switzerland and northern 
Italy. It is also heard in 
rural areas of the United 
States. Yodeling is done by 
changing a normal singing 
tone to falsetto and then 
back again in quick suc- 
cession. Raymond Kendall 

469 



T. H. Everett; New York Botanical Garden 




G. Nanja N'ath. Black star 

The Practice of Yoga combines a system of physical positions 
with severe mental discipline to reach a state of contemplation. 



YOGA is a word from the Sanskrit language, meaning 
union. It is the name of a school of thought included 
in the branch of the Hindu religion known as philo- 
sophical Hinduism. In this type of Hinduism, the aim 
is union with Brahman, the Absolute Being, or World- 
Soul. Union with Brahman is won through knowledge. 
The Yoga school is noted chiefly for its physical and 
mental discipline. 

Yoga offers detailed directions for suppressing bodily 
activity, mcluding breathing. Mental activity is also 
suppressed until the individual comes into a state of 
blissful, serene contemplation of Brahman. There are 
various levels in the practice of Yoga. A person who 
practices Yoga to achieve salvation is a yogi, or yogin. 
The sacred writings of Yoga are called the Upanishads. 
YOGURT, or Yoghurt, is the Turkish name for a 
fermented milk of cows, goats, or other cud-chewing 
animals. It has a high acid content and thick curd. 
The bacteria lactobacillus bulgariciis and streptococcus 
lactis change fresh milk into yogurt. Yogurt has long 
been important in the diet of the people of Turkey, 
the Balkans, Armenia, and Iran. Poor sanitation and 
lack of refrigeration cause fresh milk to become con- 
taminated with disease-producing bacteria. Fermenta- 
tion acts as a preservative. Yogurt, a fermented food, 
can be eaten with comparative safety. 

Yogurt has the same nutritional elements as milk 
and can be used as a substitute. Some types of yogurt 
contain as few as 15 calories an ounce, which makes 
them popular with people on low-calorie diets. 

Cultures (growths) of bacteria can be bought for 
making yogurt at home. The culture is added to fresh 
milk that has been concentrated to f of its original 
volume. The mi,\ture should be loosely covered and put 
in a warm place (1 15° F. to 120° F.) for three hours, or 
until the desired curd has developed. It is then cooled 
immediately to 40° F. or lower, and refrigerated. The 
curdled milk that results is yogurt. It can be kept for 
more than a week if refrigerated. Glenn h. Beck 

YOHO NATIONAL PARK. See Canada (National 
Parks). 

YOKOHAMA, mil kolt HAH muh (pop. 1,375,710; 
alt. 1 10 ft. J, is the fourth largest city in Japan. It is one 



of the coimtry's largest ports. It lies on the western 
shore of Tokyo Bay, about 1 8 miles south of Tokyo. 
The industrial suburb of Kawasaki separates Yoko- 
hama from Tokyo. .See J.apan (political map). 

Shipping and the import-export trade rank as Yoko- 
hama's chief industries. .Shipbuilding and ship repairing 
are afso important. The chief exports include raw silk 
and silk fabrics, tea, and Japanese lacquered ware and 
art goods. Imports include woolen and cotton materials, 
raw cotton, and sugar. Two railroads connect Yoko- 
hama with Tokyo. Yokohama also stands beside the 
main Japanese railroad line to the west. 

Yokohama was only a tiny fishing settlement in 1854, 
when Commodore Matthew Perry of the United States 
Navy signed an agreement with the Japanese that 
opened Japan to trade with the United States. About 
five years later, foreign traders opened offices in Yokoha- 
ma. After that, the city grew rapidly. On Sept. 1, 1923, 
one of the most damaging earthquakes in the history of 
the world almost completely destroyed Yokohama. 

\'okohama was nearly destroyed again during Worid 
War II. In the spring of 1945, United States bombers 
dropped thousands of fire bombs on the city. After the 
Japanese surrender to the Allied forces in September, 
1945, United States troops occupied the city and re- 
building began. Hugh Borton 

YOLK. See Egg. 

YOLK. See Wool (Qualities and Grades). 

YOM KIPPUR, yalim KIP ur, is the Jewish day of 
atonement. In the Jewish civil calendar, it falls on 
the tenth day of the first month, Tishri. Jews observe 
it as a day of fasting and worship. Yom Kippur is the 
most important and sacred Jewish holy day. On this 
day the devout Jew thinks of his sins, repents, and asks 
forgiveness from God. In ancient times, the high priest 
held a service in the Temple in Jerusalem, and sacrificed 
certain animals as a ceremonial offering. The service 
was the main event of the day. Today, Jews fast, do no 
work, and attend services in the synagogue or temple 
on Yom Kippur. The holiday begins at sunset on the 
ninth day and lasts until sunset on the tenth day. The 
laws about Yom Kippur are found in Leviticus 16; 
23:26-32; 25:9, and Numbers 29:7-11. See also Atone- 
ment; Az.'\zel; .Scapegoat. Leonard c. mishkin 

YONKERS, N.Y. (pop. 190,634; alt. 10 ft.), is a manu- 
facturing center that lies immediately north of New 
York City (see New York [color map]). 

Elisha G. Otis started manufacturing elevators in 
Yonkers in 1854. This later became a leading industry. 
Other manufactures include knit clothing, textile prod- 
ucts, hats, needlework, electrical appliances, machinery, 
chemicals and drugs, food products, iron and steel 
products, and various metal and wood products. The 
city is also a shipbuilding center. The great Port of 
New York includes ^'onkers. 

Yonkers is the home of St. Joseph's Seininary, a 
training school for the Roman Catholic priesthood. 
Philipse Manor, now a state museum, and the Hudson 
River Museum are also located there. 

In 1646, a grant to Adrian van der Donck included 
the present site of Yonkers. He was known as De Jonk- 
heer (young nobleman), and the site as De Jonkheer's 
land. The name Yonkers came from this. Yonkers be- 
caiTie a village in 1855 and a city in 1872. It has a 
council-manager government. Wiluam e. Young 



470 



YORK. See England (color map, The 39 Historic 
Counties of England). 

YORK (pop." 104,300; alt. 40 ft.) was the principal 
center of northern England in the Middle Ages. It 
stands at the junction of the rivers Ouse and Foss 
(see Great Britain [color ma]3l). The Romans, who 
founded York, called it Eboracum. The wall they built 
around the city still stands. York Minster Cathedral is 
one of the finest English churches. The Archbishop of 
York is second in authority to the Archbishop of Can- 
terbury in the Church of England. Francis h. herrick 

YORK, Pa. (pop. 54,504; met. area 290,242; alt. 370 
ft.), is an industrial center for one of the richest farming 
areas in the United States. It lies in southeastern Penn- 
sylvania, about 30 miles southeast of Harrisburg (see 
Pennsylvania [political map]). Factories there produce 
machinery, paper, textile products, cement, lime, candy, 
furniture, and cigars. 

York is the oldest settlement in Pennsylvania west of 
the .Susquehanna River. The original town was laid out 
in 1 741 under the authority of the members of the Penn 
family, the proprietors of Pennsylvania. 

During the Revolutionary War, the Continental 
Congress met there after the British took Philadelphia. 
The Congress met there from September, 1 777, to June, 
1778. Congress accepted the .Articles of Confederation 
at York. York became a borough in 1 777 and a city in 
1887. It has a commission form of government and 
is the county seat of York County. s. k. Stevens 

YORK is a branch of the English royal family of 
Plantagenet. The House of York won the English throne 
from the House of Lancaster during the Wars of the 
Roses (1455-1485). Members of the House of York 
ruled England from 1461 to 1485, with a brief inter- 
ruption in the early 1470's. See Wars of the Roses. 

Richard, Duke of York, the leader of the Yorkist 
party, was descended, through his mother, from the 
third son of King Edward III. Henry VI, the reigning 
king, was descended from Edward II I's fourth son, John 
of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster. Because he was descended 
from an older son, the Duke of York claimed that he had 
a better right to the throne than Henry VI. 

Open warfare broke out in 1455, when Henry VI was 
defeated at the first battle of St. Albans. In December, 
1460, the Duke of York was killed at the battle of Wake- 
field. But, the following year. King Henry's forces were 
decisively beaten, and York's eldest son was crowned 
Edward IV, the first Yorkist king. After losing and 
regaining his throne in 1470 and 1471 at the battles of 
Barnet and Tewkesbury, Edward ruled until 1483. 

He was succeeded by his 12-year-old son, Edward V. 
Two months later, the boy's uncle, Richard, Duke of 
Gloucester, seized the crown as Richard III, and sup- 
posedly murdered Edward and his younger brother. 

In 1485, Henry Tudor, Earl of Richmond, a descend- 
ant of the House of Lancaster, defeated and killed 
Richard III at Bosworth Field. He was crowned Henry 
VII, first ruler of the Tudor dynasty. Heniy married 
Edward IV's daughter, Elizabeth, and so at last united 
the rival houses of Lancaster and York. Paul m. Kendall 

See also Edward (IV; V); Henry (VI; VII) of Eng- 
land; Lancaster; Richard (III). 

YORK, ALVIN CULLUM(1887-1964), an outstanding 
American soldier of World War I, singlehandedly killed 
over 20 Germans and forced 1 32 others to surrender on 




nited Press Int. 



Alvin C. York 



YOSEMITE FALLS 

Oct. 8, 1918. York was a member of a patrol sent to 
silence German machine-gim nests. He shot more than 
20 Germans and forced a German major to order the 
entire group to surrender. York received the Con- 
gressional Medal of Honor 
for his deed. Marshal Fer- 
dinand Foch called it "the 
greatest thing accomplished 
by any private soldier of all 
the armies of Europe." Al- 
though he became famous 
as Sergeant York, he was a 
corporal at the time of his 
incredible feat. 

York was born in Fentress 
County, Tennessee, and 
grew up on a mountain 
farm. He developed amaz- 
ing marksmanship with the 
rifle and pistol during his boyhood. He became deeply 
religious and was reluctant to go to war, but his pastor 
persuaded him that it was his duty. h. a. deWeerd 

YORK, CAPE. See Cape York. 

YORK GAOL. See Maine (Places to Visit). 

YORK RITE. See Masonry (The Lodges and Degrees). 

YORK RIVER. See Virginia (Rivers and Lakes). 

YORK UNIVERSITY is a coeducational liberal arts 
college at I'oronto, Ont. Courses lead to the B.A. and 
B.S. degrees. York was founded in 1959 as part of the 
University of Toronto. The university is supported 
mainly by the province. For enrollment, see Canada 
(table, L'niversities and Colleges). 

YORKSHIRE TERRIER is a bright-eyed toy dog that 
weighs 4 to 8 pounds. Weavers in northern England 
developed the breed in the 1850's. They wanted a dog 
bold enough to kill rats, but small enough to be carried 
in a pocket. The Yorkshire has long, silky hair that 
touches the floor. Its coat is steel blue with a golden 

tan. Josephine Z. Rine 

See also Doc (color picture, Toy Dogs). 

YORKTOWN. See Aircraft Carrier. 

YORKTOWN, Va. (pop. 311; alt. 50 ft.), is an his- 
toric village on the York River. It lies 62 miles south- 
east of Richmond in eastern Virginia (see Virginia 
[political map]). In 1781, Lord Cornwallis surrendered 
to General George Washington at Yorktown in the 
final British defeat of the Revolutionary War. Today, 
Yorktown and the surrounding area are known as 
the Colonial National Historical Park. This includes 
the Yorktown Battlefield; much of Jamestown; and 
Colonial Parkway, a drive that connects Jamestown 
and Yorktown and passes through historic Williams- 
burg. The Cape Henry Memorial at Cape Henry is 
another part of the park. See also Revolution.\ry War 
IN .\merica (Surrender at Yorktown). Francis b. Simkins 

YOSEMITE FALLS, yoh SEHM ill tee, in California's 
Yosemite National Park, is one of the highest and most 
spectacular waterfalls in the world. It is formed by 
Yosemite Creek as it plunges 2,425 feet down a rock 
wall of Yosemite Valley. Yosemite Falls has three parts: 
the Upper Falls, 1,430 feet high; the intermediate cas- 
cade, 675 feet; and the Lower Falls, 320 feet. See also 
Waterfall (picture). John w. Reith 



471 



YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK 

YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK, yo/; SEHM ih tec, is a 
great wilderness in east-central California. It covers 
about 1,200 square miles in the heart of the Sierra 
Nevada mountains. The park lies 200 miles east of San 
Francisco. It has about 700 miles of trails. Most of the 
trails lead to the "High Sierra," a region of sparkling 
lakes, rushing streams, and jagged mountain peaks. 
The Yosemite Museum in the park houses a collection 
of Indian displays, and exhibits of the area's wildlife. 
For location, see California (color map). 

Over 60 kinds of animals and more than 200 species 
of birds live in the forests and on the mountain slopes. 
Bears and deer are numerous. Yosemite has over 30 
kinds of trees and more than 1,300 varieties of plants. 
There are three groves of the famous Sequoia Gigantea 
or Big Trees. The best known is the Mariposa Grove, 
35 miles south of Yosemite Valley. The grove includes 
the Wawona Tunnel Tree. Thousands of motorists 
drive their cars through this tree every year. The 
Grizzly Giant Tree is also in the grove. The diameter at 
its base measures more than 34 feet. 

In 1864, Congress gave Yosemite Valley to Califor- 
nia for use as a public park and recreation area. John 
Muir, a naturalist, first saw the area in the 1860's. His 
enthusiastic reports of the beauties of the region aroused 
interest in the Yosemite Valley. Congress created Yo- 
semite National Park in 1890. But the park did not 
include Yosemite Valley and the Mariposa Grove. 
California ceded these areas back to the federal govern- 
ment, and they were added to the park in 1906. The 
park has since attracted many campers and other 
visitors. It has many tourist accommodations. Skiing 
in the High Sierra is a popular sport. Some of the 
other activities available in the Yosemite area include 
horseback riding, fishing, golf, tennis, hiking, and swim- 
ming. 

Yosemite Valley. Much of the park's most spectacu- 
lar scenery is in the Yosemite Valley. The valley lies at 
a 4,000-foot elevation in the heart of the park. A group 
of explorers on their way to the Pacific Coast in the 
1830's were probably the first white men to see the 
valley. But white men did not enter it until 1851. In 
that year, members of the Mariposa Battalion, a volun- 
teer fighting force, set out to capture a group of Yo- 
seinite Indians. Tenaya, the Yosemite chief, had been 
leading his tribe in raids on white settlers in the foot- 
hills of the Sierra Nevada. The battalion captured 
Tenaya, but the white men eventually permitted the 
Indians to return to the valley, which was named for 
the tribe. 

Millions of years ago, California's Sierra Nevada was 
formed by a gradual series of earth upheavals. As the 
mountains rose, the westward-flowing Merced River 
accelerated to torrential speed and carved the narrow, 
V-shaped Merced Canyon. Later, massive glaciers 
flowed down the canyon. The glaciers ground and 
polished the canyon to a smooth U-shaped valley, 
nearly a mile wide and almost a mile deep in places. 
Tributary streams did not carve their canyons as deep 
as Merced Canyon. Glaciers sheared off these canyons, 
leaving them as "hanging valleys." Today, the world's 
greatest concentration of free, leaping waterfalls pours 
from these valleys. 



Waterfalls. Bridalveil Fall is the first waterfall seen 
by most Yosemite visitors. It graces the southern wall 
of the valley with a 620-foot descent. Nearby, the 
Illilouette Falls also tumbles over the side of the val- 
ley. Yosemite Falls is formed by Yosemite Creek, leap- 
ing free from its hanging valley 2,425 feet above the 
valley floor. The Upper Falls is 1 ,430 feet high, and the 
Lower Falls measures 320 feet high. The cascades 
between the two tumble another 675 feet. The total 
height of Yosemite Falls is about a half mile, or about 
twice the height of the Empire State Building. 

Vernal and Nevada falls offer a contrast to the falls 
plunging from hanging valleys. These two falls pour 
over giant steps formed by the action of glaciers. Vernal 
Falls, 317 feet high, is famous for the rainbows that 
sparkle in the heavy mist at its base. About a mile up- 
stream is 594-foot Nevada Falls. It is so violent that the 
Indians called it Yo-wipe or The Twisted Fall. 

The park's many other waterfalls include some that 
burst forth during the high-water season in spring. 
Notable among these are the slender 1,612-foot Ribbon 
Falls, the erratic Sentinel Falls which drops 2,000 
feet, and tlie 1,170-foot Silver Strand Falls. 

Rock Masses. A number of rock masses rise sharply 
from the valley floor. The Half Dome rises to an 8,852- 
foot elevation at the head of the valley. El Capitan, a 
gigantic mass of unbroken granite, rises vertically 3,600 
feet above the canyon. From Glacier Point, one can 
look down more than 3,000 feet into the valley, or out 
over a vast panorama of mountain scenery. The famous 
Fire Fall is another beautiful tourist attraction. Every 
evening at nine o'clock during the summer a great fire 
is built at Glacier Point. When the fire has burned to 
coals, the glowing embers are pushed slowly over the 
cliff to the bare rocks below. Cloud's Rest, the highest 
point in the valley, rises more than a mile above the 
floor of Yosemite X'alley. 

Hetch Hefchy Valley lies in the northwestern part of 
the park. It was carved by the Tuolumne River and 
ancient glaciers in much the same manner as Yosemite 
Valley. A reservoir now covers the floor of the valley. 
The Grand Canyon of the Tuolumne River is above 
Hetch Hetchy, to the east. The river rushes through 
the canyon at great speed, dropping 4,000 feet in four 
miles. It creates many cascades and waterfalls, includ- 
ing the Waterwheel Falls, a series of amazing pin- 
wheels of water. Some of the pinwheels rise as high as 
40 feet. They are formed when the river, cascading 
down a steep granite apron, strikes rocky obstructions 
in the river bed. 

The Tuolumne River flows through Tuolumne 
Meadows, a vast grassland. The meadows have an 
elevation of about 8,500 feet. Every year, thousands of 
tourists camp on the almost level meadow. The area is 
also used as a base camp by mountain climbers. 
Tenaya Lake, near Tuolumne Meadows on the Tioga 
Road, is the largest and most beautiful of the park's 
more than 300 lakes. 

Transportation. Yosemite is a year-round park. Most 
roads remain open throughout the winter. However, 
snows close roads in the High Sierra region from about 

mid-autumn until late spring. Robert D. Thomson 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Bridalveil Fall Nevada Falls .Sequoia 

Muir, John Ribbon Falls Yosemite Falls 



472 



YOSEMITE 



Mighty El Capitan towers 3,604 feet above the Merced River 
in lov/er Yosemite Valley. The hard granite rock resisted the 
glacier that carved out the valley thousands of years ago. 

■^^ Boh &amp; Ira Sprins 




YOSHIHITO 

YOSHIHITO, yoh shee HEE toh (1879-1926), was em- 
peror of Japan from 1912 to 1926. The son of emperor 
Mutsuhito, he called his reign Taisho (Great Righteous- 
ness). His reign continued social and political changes 
begun under his father. Political party leaders con- 
trolled the government and Yoshihito played little 
part in the events of his reign. He became mentally 
ill. His son Hirohito assumed his duties in 1921. See 
also Hirohito; Mutsuhito. Marius b. Jansen 

YOST, "HURRY-UP", FIELDING H. See Football 
(Famous Football Players and Coaches). 

YOUNG, BRIGHAM (1801-1877), was one of the 
greatest leaders of the Mormon Church (properly called 
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints). 
Young became the church's second president during a 
time of great crisis. By his ability, courage, and strength, 
he guided the Mormons through troubled times, led 
them from the Midwest to what is now Utah, and 
helped establish the basis for his church's growth. 

Early Life. Young was born in Whitingham, Vt., the 
son of a poor farmer. In 1804, Young's father took the 
family to western New York in search of greater 
opportunity. But the family remained poor, and Brig- 
ham spent only about 12 days in school. Instead, he 
worked as a house painter and a carpenter. He never 
forgot his early poverty and he later preached the value 
of hard work and thrift. By 1830, Young had settled in 
Monroe County, New York. He studied and accepted 
the religious teachings of Mormon founder Joseph 
Smith there. Young was baptized a Mormon in 1832, 
and soon became one of Smith's most faithful followers. 

Mormon Leader. Non-Mormons, called '"gentiles" 
by the Mormons, drove the Mormons from settlements 
in Ohio and Missouri in the 1830's. Young, Smith, and 
other church members then settled in Far West, Mo. 
Anti-MoiTnonism also developed there, and ''gentiles" 
imprisoned Smith and other Mormon leaders in 1838. 
But Young escaped capture and led about 15,000 
Mormons across the Mississippi River to safety in 
Illinois. In the difficult months that followed. Young 
firmly established himself as leader by keeping the 
Mormons together and finding supplies for them. 

During a brief period of peace after 1839, Young 
went on several missions. In Great Britain, he con- 
verted many people to his faith and arranged for them 
to come to the United States. While Young was preach- 
ing in New England, Smith was murdered at Nauvoo, 
111. Young hurried there. He found the church badly 
divided and its members uncertain whom they should 
follow. Young made a powerful speech that won most 
Mormons to his side. He was the undisputed leader of 
the Monnons from that time until he died. 

Settles in Utah. ''Gentiles" forced the Mormons out 
of Illinois in 1846. Starting in the dead of winter. 
Young led his followers on a long, painful journey 
across the Mississippi River and Iowa to the Missouri 
River. But Young decided from past experience that 
there could be no lasting peace for his people until 
they were completely separated from the ''gentiles." 
So in 1847, Young and an advance party began a long 
westward trip to the basin of the Great Salt Lake. 
Although a desolate and barren area, the basin ap- 
pealed to Young because only Indians lived there. 




Brigliam Young 



Young then supervised the 
migration of thousands of 
olher Mormons to Lhah. 
He was formally elected 
president in 1847. 

The Moiinons prospered 
in LUah. L'nder Young's 
supei-vision, they devel- 
oped irrigation techniques, 
and parts of the desert soon 
blossomed into fruitful 
farmland. Young encour- 
aged the Mormons to 
produce all the goods they 
needed, and they became 
largely self-sufficient. 

Young also served as the first governor of the Territory 
of L'tah. He also found time to direct missionary work 
and spread Mormon influence in the West. 

But the flight to Utah had not ended the Mormons' 
troubles. "Gentiles" came to the territory, and some 
who were anti-MoiTnon held political posts under the 
L'nited States government. Stories circulated that 
\'oung was a tyrant who opposed freedom in L'tah. 
.Some of Young's enemies blamed him for the Moun- 
tain Meadows Massacre of 1857, in which 120 persons 
were killed by Mormons and Indians. These reports 
alarmed the federal government and caused President 
James Buchanan to send troops to LItah. Resentment 
toward the Mormon practice of polygamy (marriage to 
more than one wife) became widespread. Congress and 
other groups brought pressure on the Mormons to end 
the practice. But in spite of all opposition. Young re- 
mained the most powerful man in Utah until he died. 

His Place in History. Critics have accused Young 
of intolerance to opposition. Many persons found dis- 
tasteful his practice of polygamy, which led him to take 
27 wives. However, Young's leadership ability and his 
pioneering efforts rank him as one of the most important 
men in the histoi-y of the American West. L'nder his 
guidance, a broken and homeless church withstood 
opposition and prospered on a barren frontier. Young 
encouraged his followers to work hard and be thrifty. 
But he also urged them to dance, sing, and enjoy life, 
as he did. The Mormons loved Brigham \'oung. When 
he would visit a Mormon community, the entire 
village would turn out to greet him. The successor of 
Joseph Smith, he had become the most important man 

in their church. Norman F. FuRNiss 

See also Mormons; LItah; Smith, Joseph; Latter 
Da'v Saints, Reorg.anized Church of Jesus Christ of. 

YOUNG, CHARLES AUGUSTUS (1834-1908), an 
American astronomer, did pioneer studies in the physics 
of the sun. During a total eclipse of the sun in Iowa in 
1 869, he made the first observation of the spectrum of 
the sun's corona. At the 1870 eclipse, he observed the 
flash spectrum and proved the existence of the chromo- 
sphere, a region in the sun's gaseous shell. Young also 
deteiTnined the rate of rotation of the sun on its axis. 
His book. The Sun. was published in 1881. Young was 
born in Hanover, N.H., and studied at Dartmouth Col- 
lege, where he became professor of astronomy in 1866. 
He taught, and directed the observatoi-y at Princeton 
L'niversity from 1877 to 1905. Helen Wrioht 

YOUNG, CHIC. See Comics (Blondie). 



474 



YOUNG, CY (1867-1955), was one of baseball's 
greatest right-handed pitchers. He won a record 5 1 1 
major-league games between 1890 and 1911. Young 
pitched for the Cleveland Spiders, St. Louis Nationals, 
Boston Red Sox, Cleveland Indians, and Boston 
Braves. Denton True Young was born in Gihnore, 
Ohio. He was elected to the National Baseball Hall of 
Fame in 1937. Joseph p. spohn 

YOUNG, EDWARD (1683-1765), was an English poet 
and critic. His poem The Complaint^ or Night Thoughts 
on Life, Death, and Immortality (1742-1745) became 
popular and brought him lasting fame. His Conjectures 
on Original Composition (1759) is an essay challenging 
neoclassical views. It foreshadowed romantic literary 
theory. He also wrote two tragedies, Busiris (1719) and 
The Revenge (1721). But neither won lasting acclaim. 
Youngwas born at Upham, England. George f. Sensabaugh 

YOUNG, ELLA (1865-1956), was an Irish author and 
storyteller. She was a student at the Royal University 
ill Dublin at the time of the Irish Renaissance of art and 
literature. She published two books of Irish fairy- tales, 
Celtic Wonder Tales (1910) and The Wonder-Smith and 
His Son (1925). 

In 1925, Miss Young came to the United States, 
where she published The Tangle-Coated Horse (1929) and 
The Unicorn with Silver Shoes (1932). She gained fame in 
the United States as a stoiyteller and speaker, and be- 
came a professor at the University of California in 1931. 
.She published her autobiography, Flowering Dusk, in 
1945. Ella Young was born in Fenagli, County Antrim, 

in Nortliern Ireland. Jean Thomson 

YOUNG, ELLA FLAGG (1845-1918), was the first 
woman to serve as superintendent of schools in a large 
city. She held this position in Chicago from 1909 to 
1915. Her chief contribution was to introduce home 
economics, manual training, and other studies of a 
practical nature. Ella Flagg Young was born in Buffalo, 

N .1 . Claude A. Eggertsen 

YOUNG, JOHN WATTS (1930- ), a navy test 
pilot, became a U.S. astronaut in 1962. He and fellow 
astronaut \ irgil I. Grissom were selected for the t\vo- 
man Project Gemini space flight in 1964. Yoimg was 
project pilot and program manager for the navy F4H 
weapons system program. He was born on .Sept. 24, 
1930, in San Francisco. Young received a B..S. degree in 
aeronautical engineering from Georgia Institute of 
Technology in 1952, then joined the navy. Ford Eastman 

See also .\stron.\ut (picture). 

YOUNG, OWEN D. (1874-1962), was an American 
businessman. As chairman of tlie second committee of 
financial experts of the Allied Reparations Commis- 
sion, he helped plan the settlement of Germany's World 
War I debts and reparations by "The Young Plan" of 
1929. From 1922 to 1939, he served as chairman of the 
board of the General Electric Company. He organized 
the Radio Corporation of America in 1919. Young was 
born in Van Horncsville, N.Y. Donald l. Kemmerer 

YOUNG, STARK (1881-1963), an American author, 
became best known for So Red the Rose (1934), a histori- 
cal novel. He served as an editor for The .\'ew Republic 
magazine from 1921 to 1947, and for Theatre Arts 
Monthly from 1921 to 1940. He translated several of 
Anton Chekhov's plays, and was editor of .4 Southern 
Treasury of Art and Literature. Young was born in 

Como, Miss. • George J. Becker 



YOUNG MEN'S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION 

YOUNG, THOMAS. See Light (The Nature of Light). 

YOUNG ADULT. See Teen Age. 

YOUNG CHEVALIER. See Stuart, Charles E. L. 

YOUNG ITALY. See Mazzini, Giuseppe. 

YOUNG MEN'S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION (YMCA) 
is a world-wide organization, made up chiefly of boys 
and young men imder 25 years of age. It seeks to give 
young people a healthy outlook on life through greater 
self-development of body, mind, and spirit. The attain- 
ment of this goal is emphasized through physical fitness, 
mental training, religious ideals, fellowship, vocational 
guidance, citizenship, and service. 

The association has members in more than 80 coun- 
tries. About 3,950,000 YMCA members in the United 
States and Canada belong to more than 2,000 local as- 
sociations. 

Beginnings and Growth. George Williams, a young 
clerk in London, England, founded the Young Men's 
Christian .•\ssociation. He and groups of his friends used 
to meet for prayer and Bible study classes. In 1844, they 
decided to form an organization to spread Christianity, 
and founded the YMCA. Their group grew rapidly. 
In 1851, groups of young men formed associations in 
Montreal, Canada, and in Boston. 

On June 7, 1854, the first convention of the North 
.American Associations met in Buffalo, N.Y. There were 
37 delegates from 19 associations. In 1855, the YMCA 
held its first World Conference in Paris. By that time it 
had 379 associations in seven different countries. The 
total membership had grown to 30,360. .Although pop- 
ular in many countries, the YMCA has had its greatest 
development in the United States and Canada. 

In 1869, the New York City YMCA erected its own 
building. Then, for the first time, all tlie activities of the 
association were gadiered togetlier under the same roof. 
These activities dealt with religion, social work, educa- 
tion, and physical training. Today the value of YMCA 
buildings and funds in the LInited States and Canada 
amounts to about $480,000,000. 

The YMCA provides gym classes and other kinds of activities for 
grade-school children, high-school students, and young men. 

Young Men's Chrisdan Assoc. 





YMCA's sponsor recreational programs like the Indian Guide 
Tribes, where fathers and sons meet each week to talk about 
Indian lore, build totem poles, and plan outdoor activities. 

Program of the YMCA is designed to develop leader- 
ship. Group activities center around classes and teams, 
and discussion, special-interest, and hobby groups. 

Women and girls are admitted to membership and to 
many program activities. They make up about 20 per 
cent of the total membership in North America. 

Association programs among Negroes began about 
1853. Separate facilities and branches were usually pro- 
vided. Julius Rosenwald. the philanthropist, gave 
money to help build YMCA buildings for Negroes in 
many cities in the United States. 

The YMCA education program provides both high 
school and college training. About 75,000 students are 
enrolled every year. Most of them are employed. The 
association college program includes schools of com- 
merce, law, engineering, liberal arts, and trade and 
business. Many of the colleges grant degrees. 

The association employs about 4,000 professional 
workers to direct its activities in the United States and 
Canada. These YMCA secretaries are especially trained 
for executive positions. The World Service Program, 
begun in 1889, provides experienced leaders to direct 
association activities in other countries. 

War Services were first begun by the YMCA during 
the Civil War. These activities increased with each 
succeeding war and reached their fullest development 
during World War II. The YMCA was one of the found- 
ing agencies of the United Service Organizations. It 
maintained more than 450 clubs for the Allied armed 
forces. It also raised a fund of $12,642,622 for prisoners 
of war. About 6,000,000 war prisoners of all nations 
were aided. 

Publications. The YMCA's publishing agenc;, is 
called the Association Press. Its publications include the 
i'MCA Yearbook, National Council Bulletin, Christian 
Citizenship, T IVork with Youth, The Inter-Collegian (pub- 
lished jointly with the YWCA), Journal of Physical 
Education, and Association Forum, a professional journal. 

International headquarters of the YMCA are located 
in Geneva, Switzerland. In the United States, the 
national council of the YMCA has its offices at 291 

Broadway, New York 7, N.Y. Clifford M. Carey 

See also Gulick, Luther H.; Hi-Y Club; Mott, 
John R.; Young Women's Christian Association. 

476 



YOUNG MEN'S HEBREW ASSOCIATION (YMHA) 

is a name given to certain local organizations in the 
United States that are affiliated with the National Jew- 
ish Welfare Board. The purpose of the YMHA is to pro- 
mote the religious and intellectual well-being of Ameri- 
can Jews, and to provide programs for the development 
of Judaism and good citizenship. The YMHA was 
founded in Baltimore in 1854. By 1890, it claimed more 
than 130 local chapters. In 1947, it joined the Young 
Women's Hebrew Association (YWHA) and the Jewish 
community centers to form the World Federation of 
YMHA's and YVVHA's and Jewish community centers. 
This organization has nearly 600,000 members in the 
United States. It maintains headquarters at 145 East 

32d St., New York 16, N.Y. Bernard Postal 

YOUNG PEOPLE'S SOCIETY OF CHRISTIAN EN- 
DEAVOR. See Christian Endeavor. 

YOUNG PLAN. See War Debt (German Repara- 
tions); Young, Owen D. 

YOUNG PRETENDER. See Stuart, Charles E. L.; 
Scotland (Union with England). 

YOUNG TURKS. See Turkey (History). 

YOUNG WOMEN'S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION 
(YWCA) is an international Christian women's move- 
ment. Its members believe in the importance of the 
Christian way of life, not only for individuals but also 
for society. The organization tries to include in its fellow- 
ship a representative group of women and girls of all 
races and nationalities. 

Activities. Educational and recreational activities are 
carried on by local associations, many of which also 
sponsor summer camps. Girls are aided in their search 
for employment and living quarters. The Public Affairs 
program emphasizes international relations. 

There are YWCA programs in 5.400 locations in 
cities, towns, and rural communities, and on college 
campuses across the United States. Included in the total 
number of YWCA's are nearly 500 student associations. 
The YWCA has more than 2,000,000 members in the 
United States. Its more than 780 buildings are valued 
at more than $100,000,000. 

The YWCA is a member agency of the United Serv- 
ice Organization (USO) and operates 15 USO clubs in 
the United States. It also offers programs for military 
personnel and their families in communities that have 
no U.SO center. Immediately after the end of World 
War II, the National Board of the YWCA organization 
did war-service work in more than 140 communities. 
The world emergency work of the association also 
brought aid to suffering peoples. 

History. A group of London women led by Emma 
Robarts organized a young women's association in 
1855. Their purpose was to find housing for the nurses 
who had returned from the Crimean War. 

At about the same time, anotlier woman's group in 
London organized prayer circles. These two groups 
united and became known as the Young Women's 
Christian Association. 

The London Association movement soon spread to 
the United States. The first LInited States organization 
of this type was founded in New York City in 1858. It 
was known as the Ladies" Christian Association. The 
first YWCA in the United States was organized in 
Boston in 1866. From these beginnings, the movement 
grew rapidly, especially in industrial cities. Later the 




YWCA's provide swimming pools and many other recreoMonol 
and educational activities for women and girls. Some YWCA's 



\ W CA 

sponsor mother-child swimming periods where parents may receive 
professional help in teaching their children how to swim. 



YWCA took up work in colleges and universities. It 
founded the first student Y\VCA in Xormal, 111., in 
1873. .Separate organizations arose in the Middle West 
and in the East. In 1906. these organizations united as 
the Young Women's Christian .Associations of the L'nited 
States of America. 

The \'WC.\ in the United States has always been in- 
terested in the lives of women in other lands. In 1894, 
the first \'A\'C.-\ secretary in foreign service was sent to 
India. This work has continued and expanded. Its ob- 
ject is to develop women as Christian leaders in coun- 
tries in all parts of the world. 

The \'WC:A of the United States, with headquarters 
at 600 Lexington Ave.. New York 22, N.Y., is a member 
of the World YWCA. .Seventy-one countries are repre- 
sented in the World \'\VC.A. This organization has 
headquarters at Geneva, Switzerland. Id.\ SLo.\&gt;i Snyder 

See also Young Men's Christian .Assoclation; 
Y-Teens. 

YOUNG WOMEN'S HEBREW ASSOCIATION. At one 
time, \arious local organizations of young Jewish wom- 
en were known as Young NVomen's Hebrew Associa- 
tions. There are now no separate organizations by this 
name. 

Some of the associations hav-e combined with Young 
Men's Hebrew Associations and are known as YM and 
'^'WHA's. Others have become part of Jewish com- 
munity centers. All the local groups belong to the 
National Jewish Welfare Board. 

Jewish communit)' centers and the combined YM 
and ^'^YH.A"s work to further the well-being of American 
Jews.Theyalsopromotegood citizenship practicesamong 



their members, and encourage an interest in civic affairs. 

The National Jewish Welfare Board has headquarters 

at 14.T E. 32d St., New York 16, N.Y. Ber,nard Postal 

YOUNGBERRY. See Breeding (Plant Breeding); 

LOG.WBERRV. 

YOUNGSTOWN, Ohio (pop. 166.689; alt. 840 ft.), 
is one of the great steel-producing centers of the world. 
It ranks fourth among steel centers in the United 
States. Youngstown lies in the northeastern part of 
Ohio. It is midway between Cleveland and Pittsburgh, 
and midway between New York and Chicago. For 
location, see Ohio (color map). 

Youngstown maintains parks and recreation areas 
throughout the cit\'. Mill Creek Park has more than 
2,300 acres and is one of the most beautiful natural 
parks in the country. Youngstown institutions include 
the Youngstown Public Librar\- with its 13 branches, 
Youngstown University. Butler Institute of American 
Art, Stambaugh .Auditorium, and the Youngstown 
Playhotise. 

Youngstown steel products include coils, sheets, pipe, 
bars, and stainless steel. The city has foundries, machine 
shops, metal fabricators, and mill equipment suppliers. 
Youngstown factories also produce aluminum products, 
automoti\'e parts, electric light bulbs, electronic equip- 
ment, leather products, office equipment, paints, paper 
products, plastics, rubber goods, and textile goods. 

Youngstown was settled in 1 797 and named in honor 
of John Young of New York, who bought the site of the 
future city from the Connecticut Land Company. The 
town was incorporated in 1848. It has a mayor-council 
type of government. James h. Rodabauoh 



477 



YOUNGSTOWN UNIVERSITY 

YOUNGSTOWN UNIVERSITY is a private nonsec- 
tarian univeisily for men and women at Youngstown, 
Ohio. It has a college of arts and sciences, and schools 
of business administration, education, engineering, and 
music. Youngstown grants bachelor's degrees. The 
university was founded in 1908. For enrollment, see 
Universities and Colleges (table). h. w. jones 

YOUTH. See Teen Age; Adolescence. 

YOUTH, ALLIED. See Allied Youth, Inc. 

YOUTH FOR CHRIST INTERNATIONAL is a non- 
profit organization specializing in teen-age evangelism. 
Founded in 1944, it has more than 300 local groups in 
the United States, Canada, and about 45 other coun- 
tries. Its local interdenominational groups sponsor 
youth rallies, contests, and camps designed to supple- 
ment the work of local churches. The organization has 
headquarters in Wheaton, 111. Its official publication is 
the Toiilli for Christ Magazine. Ted w. Enqstrom 

YOUTH HOSTEL is an overnight lodging place con- 
stmcted for members of American Youth Hostels, Inc. 
The association encourages inexpensive travel as a 
means of recreation and exercise. Members may bicycle, 
hike, ride horseback, or canoe from one hostel to another. 
Hostels are usually located about 10 or 15 miles apart. 

Hostels are found in most parts of the United States, 
Canada, and Europe. There are many special loops {cir- 
cuits) of hostels in the United States for tours of such 
scenic districts of the coimtry as New England, the 
Great Lakes region, the Rocky Mountains, and the 
Pacific Coast. Other hostels are situated so that mem- 
bers can travel for months at a time throughout countries. 

Each hostel is supervised by hostel parents who pro- 
vide sleeping quarters and food at a low cost. Hostels 
are usually equipped with a common kitchen, a dining 
room, and a recreation room. The length of time anyone 
can stay at one hostel is usualh- three days. 
Members of American Youth Hostels prepare lo leave 
a hostel and begin another stage of their cycle trip. 

Cora. Black Star 




Youth hostels were originated by Richard Schirr- 
mann, a German schoolteacher of Altena, Germany, in 
1910. He founded hostels in the former state of West- 
phalia, Germany. His idea was to encourage people to 
spend more of their time outdoors. The plan became 
popular and quickly spread to most European countries. 

The first youth hostel in North America was estab- 
lished in a tent in 1933 at Bragg Creek, Alberta, 
Canada, by two sisters, Mary and Catherine Barclay. 
They founded Canadian Youth Hostels. In the United 
States, Isabel and Monroe Smith introduced tlie first 
hostel, at Northfield, Mass., in 1934. The American 
Youth Hostels, Inc., has headquarters at 14 VV. 8th 

St., New York, N.Y. 1001 1. Justin J. Cune 

YOUTH MOVEMENT was the term used after World 
War I for organized groups of young people who began 
to seek political influence through various planned cam- 
paigns. In Europe, Fascist and Communist govern- 
ments often directed youth movements. Some of these 
groups attained considerable power. 

YPRES, E pr\ or, in Flemish, Ieper, YAT per (pop. 
18,121; alt. 60 ft.), is a Belgian city in West Flanders 
that lies 35 miles southwest of Ostend. For location, see 
Belgium (color map). Linen and lace are made in 
Ypres from the flax of Flanders. 

The city reached a high point of fame about 1300, 
when it became a center of the textile industry. It was 
one of the largest European cities at that time. Its 
population was about 20,000, almost as great as that of 
London. In World War I, Ypres was the scene of some 
of the severest fighting, and it was almost destroyed 
(see World War I [Trench Warfare]). The city was re- 
built, but again became a battleground during World 

War II. Daniel H. Thomas 

YTTERBIUM, //( TUR bih urn (chemical symbol, Yb), 
belongs to the lanthanum group of rare-earth metals. Its 
atomic number is 70, and its atomic weight is 173.04. 
Jean de Marignac of Switzerland first discovered the 
metal in 1878. But in 1907, Georges Urbain of France 
found that the substance discovered by Marignac 
actually contained two elements, which he named 
lutctium and neoytterbium. Neoytterbium was later 
listed as ytterbium. Ytterbium is one of the scarcest 
chemical elements. Less than 3 grams of ytterbium are 
found in an average ton of the earth's crust. It is ordi- 
narily prepared by fractional distillation and electroly- 
sis (see Electrol-^'SIs). The common oxide is colorless. 
It has few industrial uses as yet, because it is expensive 
to prepare. See also Element, Chemical; Rare Earth. 

YTTRIUM, IT rih urn (chemical symbol, Y), resembles 
the rare-earth metals. Its atomic number is 39, and its 
atomic weight is 88.905. The Finnish chemist Johan 
Gadolin first discovered yttrium in 1794. Yttrium is a 
common ingredient of the minerals xenotime, euxenite, 
and gadolinite. The yttrium subgroup consists of 
metals isolated from the mineral yttria. The metals 
have higher atomic weights than yttrium. Yttrium 
is obtained from yttrium oxide by electrolysis (see 
Electrolysis). When produced, it usually has rare- 
earth impurities. It is best separated from the rare- 
earth elements by using ion-exchange processes. Pure 
yttrium is used for alloying purposes, and shows promise 
of use in the construction of atomic reactors. Radio- 
active yttrium is used in treating cancer. See also 
Element, Chemical; Rare Earth. 



478 



YUAN, yoo AHX, is the Chinese word for dollar. In 
Nationalist China, people refer to the Xew Taiwan Dol- 
lar as a yuan. Communist China uses the yuan as its 
basic unit of cunency. It is divided into 10 chiao, each 
worth 10 fen. In 1914, China established the yuan as 
a silver coin with 23.4934 grams of pure silver. It 
usually circulates now as paper money \vith little silver 

backing. Lewis M. Re.^oan 

YUCATAN, TOO kuh TAH.H, is a Mexican state on a 
level plain at the northern end of the Yucatan Penin- 
sula. It has a population of 614,049 and covers 14,868 
square miles. The state has no rivers but wells provide 
water for the people. Henequen is the chief farm 
product, and forests produce chicle and hardwood 
lumber. Merida is the capital. Yucatan was one of the 
original states of Mexico. For location, see Mexico 

(map). See also MeRID.^i. Charles C. CUMBERLA.ND 

YUCATAN CHANNEL. See Gulf of Mexico. 

YUCATAN PENINSULA, yoo kuh TAH.K, includes the 
southeastern Mexican states of Campeche and Yucatan 
and the territon,' of Quintana Roo; British Honduras; 
and part of El Peten, a department of Guatemala. The 
peninsula separates the Gulf of Mexico from the 
Caribbean Sea. It covers about 70,000 square miles. 
For location, see Mexico (color map). 

The peninsula is a low, rolling tableland of coral and 
limestone covered by a thin layer of soil. It has a hot, 
humid climate. Tropical rain forests cover the low- 
lands. The chief cities include Merida, capital of 
Yucatan; Campeche, capital of Campeche; and Pro- 
greso, Yucatan, the peninsula's chief port. 

Quintana Roo and British Honduras lie along the 
eastern coast of the peninsula. The state of Yucatan is 
in the nordiem part of the peninsula. The state of 
Campeche lies south and west of the state of Yucatan. 
Part of El Peten in Guatemala is inland in the southern 
part of the peninsula. 

Most of the people, called Yucatecos, are descendants 
of the Maya Indians who lived in Yucatan hundreds of 



^^S 


IsEHIi^^^^B 


lA ,-' 

/e1~- 


H^^5 


BJ^Kf . 


■w^ 




n^cXr/bbFanS 




MEXICO ^^^ 
^^^\ V GUATEM/ 


^^^^ 




HONDURAS- 


t^^^::^:::::^^:::::^:::::::::::::::::^^ 


HONDURAS -^. 
DOR'' ^NICARAGUA 


S PAC\F\Q 





Yucatan Peninsula Borders on the Gulf of Mexico. 

years before the Spaniards arrived (see Maya). Ancient 
ruins of the Mayan civilization have been discovered at 
Chichen Itza in Yucatan. Most Yucatecos are farmers. 
Northern Yucatan is one of the chief henequen-raising 
areas of the world. Henequen is used in making rope 
and twine. Other crops include cacao, chicle, coffee, 
com, cotton, sugar cane, and tobacco. 

Francisco Fernandez de Cordoba, a Spaniard, came 



YUCCA HOUSE NATIONAL MONUMENT 

to the peninsula in 1 5 1 7. By 1 542, Francisco de Montejo 
the Younger had set up Spanish rule over half of Yuca- 
tan and established the cities of Campeche and Merida. 
Some of the Indians became slave laborers on henequen 
plantations. During the 1800's and 1900's, the Indians 
revolted se\-eral times against the Mexican government. 
They won most of the land in Campeche and Yucatan 
from the Mexican landlords. .Salvador Alvarado and 
Felipe Carillo, who served as governors of Yucatan in 
the early 1900's, introduced many reforms. 

See also British Ho.nduras; Campeche; Merida; 
Qljintana Roo. 

YUCCA, TUK uh, is the name of a group of shrubs or 
trees of the agave family. The yucca plant has a striking 
appearance. It is an evergreen plant, and does not shed 
its leaves each year. There are many varieties of the 
yucca plant. 

Some yucca plants have short stems and others have 
tall woody and scaly tmnks. The leaves of the yucca 
plants are usually pointed, stiff, and narrow, with saw- 
like or fibrous edges. They grow along the stem or in 
clustere at the end of a stem. The NTJcca plant has flow- 
ers shaped somewhat like bells. Certain varieties of the 
\TJcca have whitish-green flowere, while others have 
white or cream-colored flowers. These flowers grow in a 
cluster on a stem which springs up from the center of a 
cluster of leaves. Some of these flowers give off a strong 
fragrance when they open at night. The )'ucca has large 
fruits that may be either fleshy or dry. They contain 
many small, flat, black seeds. 

Yuccas grow most abundantly in the southern and 
southwestern parts of the United States. They also grow 
in the desert highlands and plateaus of Mexico. NIost 
of the species are low shrubs. But in deserts of the south- 
western United States, and in Mexico, there are several 
species that become large, picturesque trees. The Joshua 
Tree National Monument in California contains impor- 
tant collections of yucca trees. The popular northern 
species of ^oicca is called Adam's-needle. 

The Indians found many uses for )aicca plants. They 
made rope, sandals, mats, and baskets from the leaf 
fibers. They ate the buds and flowers raw or boiled. The 
Indians dried the fleshy fmits and ate them during the 
winter. They also made a femicnted drink from the 
fruits. The roots and stems of the VTicca make a soap. 
Some kinds of xoicca are known as soapwced. 

Yuccas serve as decorative plants in gardens through- 
out the United States. They are frequendy grown as 
border plants. 

Scientific Classification. Yuccas belong to the agave 
family, Agaiaceae. The common yucca tree or Joshua 
tree is genus lucca, species } . btevijolia. .Another com- 
mon species, T. baccata, is found in the dry areas 
of the United States and Mexico. The soapweed, T. glauca, 
is found from New Mexico to the Dakotas. The .\dam's- 
needle yucca is i . filaineniosa. edml'nd c. jaeger 

See also Flovs-er (color picture, Flowers of the Desert); 
Spanish B.avonet. 

YUCCA HOUSE NATIONAL MONUMENT stands on 
the eastern slope of Sleeping Ute Mountain in Colo- 
rado. It contains mins and relics of prehistoric inhabi- 
tants. The 9.6-acre monument, established in 1919, is 
not open to the public because of its inconvenient 
location, and because it has not been excavated. 



479 



YUGOSLAVIA 




World War I Started Soon After Archduke Francis Ferdinand Was Killed at the Bridge at Sarajevo, above. 



YUGOSLAVIA, YOO goh SLAH vih uh, is a moun- 
tainous countiy in south-central Europe. It is the 
northernmost country in the Balkan Peninsula. The 
name Tugoslavia means Land of the Soiitit Slats. Its 
official name in the Serbo-Croatian language is Soci- 
jALisTicKA Federativna Republika Jugoslavija, Or 
the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. 
Belgrade is the capital and largest city. 

Yugoslavia' covers an area a little larger than the state 
of Wyoming. But more than 50 times as many people 
live in Yugoslavia as live in Wyoming. 

The people of Yugoslavia are divided into many 
religious and language groups. But they are united in 
a fierce national pride and a strong spirit of independ- 
ence from outside interference. 

The land of Yugoslavia shows many contraists. The 
long, pleasant Adriatic coastland is a popular resort 
area. But few people live in the harsh climate of the 
rugged mountains that rise from the coastal strip. 
Beyond the mountains, in the interior of the country', 
lie the rich fields and forests of the Danube Plain. 

Yugoslavia Borders on the Adriatic Sea. 



a' 'v.^^austria / ' ,' 

'y .,, /' V_ &gt; - HUNGARY / 

SWIIZERIAND l^^^^^^L. .^BC^ ROMANIA 

Xf 




S ^'^0 '•■/ &lt;:#• '., 



■/-',, 



;•/- 



^\.) 



.•K'llf f.'l-'A'li A'J '.[.■, 



fl"^'--- 



Yugoslavia is divided into si.x regions, on the basis 
of political and cultural boundaries. Slovenia lies high 
in the mountains of northwestern Yugoslavia. Croatia 
is a crescent-shaped area that extends along the Sava 
River and along the coast. Bosnia-Hercegovina lies in 
the center of the crescent. Serbia forms the eastern third 
of the country. To the south of Serbia lies Macedonia. 
Montenegro is wedged in between Bosnia-Hercegovina 



FACTS IN BRIEF 



Type of Government: Communist dictatorship. 

Capitol: Belgrade. 

Official Languages: Slovene, Macedonian, and Serbo- 
Croat. 

Divisions: 6 administrative areas; Serbia has an auton- 
omous province and an autonomous region. 

Head of Slate: President. 

Parliament: A Federal Assembly having 670 members, 
and divided into live chambers. Assembly members are 
elected by district assemblies. The assemblies are elected 
by the people. 

Area: 98,766 square miles. Greatest distance: (northwest- 
southeast) about 575 miles; (east-west) about 400 miles. 
Coastline, about 1,000 miles. 

Elevation: Highest, Triglav, 9,393 feet above sea level; 
Lowest, sea level. 

Population: 19,615,000. Density, 198 persons per sq. 
mile. Distribution, rural, 80 per cent; urban, 20 per 
cent. 

Chief Products: Agriculture, barley, cattle, corn, fruit, 
horses, oats, pigs, poultry, sugar beets, tobacco, wheat. 
Mineral, antimony, bauxite, chromium, coal, copper, 
gold, iron, lead, manganese. Manujacturing, cement, lum- 
ber, machinery, metals, sugar, textiles, wines. 

Flog; TIh' flag has three horizontal stripes of red, 
white, and Ijlue with a gold-bordered red star in the 
center. See Fi.AG (color picture, Flags of Europe). 

Notional Holiday: Nov. 29, birthday of the Republic. 

Notional Anthem: "Hej Slo\'eni" ("Hey Sla\'s"). 

Money: Basic unit, dinar. One hundred paras equal one 
dinar. For the value of the dinar in dollars, see Money 
(table). 



480 







Yugoslavia is 

than the stote 



a little lorger 
of Wyoming. 



and Serbia on the north and Albania on the south. 

The Land and Its Resources 

Location, Size, and Surface Features. Yugoslavia 
lies on the west side of the Balkan Peninsula, along the 
Adriatic Sea. It covers 98,766 square miles. The Color 
Map shows the boundaries of Yugoslavia. 

Yugoslavia has three main geographic regions: a 
coastal plain, a mountain chain, and a great inland 
river valley. The coastal plain is a narrow strip along 
the Adriatic Sea. Low islands lie parallel to the coast. 

Behind the coastal plain, 
a chain of rugged moun- 
tains extends across the 
countPi' from northwest to 
southeast. A dry, stony 
plateau called the Karst 
makes up most of this 
mountain chain. In the 
southeast, the mountains 
split into two chains, one 
extending into Greece, and 
the other into Bulgaria. 
Most farms lie in the Danube \"alley (called Dunav 
in Yugoslavia), and most of the people live there. 

Rivers and Lakes. Yugoslavia's rivers drain into 
three seas. The Neretva is the only important river 
flowing into the Adriatic. The Vardar River and its 
branches drain southeastern Yugoslavia, flowing 
through Greece to the .Aegean Sea. The most important 
waterway in Yugoslavia is the Danube and its main 
branch in Yugoslavia, the Sava. The Danube drains 
all northern and eastern Yugoslavia and flows to the 
Black Sea. On its way, it flo\ss through a narrow gap 
between the Transylvanian ,\lps and the Balkan Moun- 
tains. This important passage is called the Iron Gate. 

George Kish, the contributor of this article, is Professor of 
Geography at the L 'niversity of Michigan. 

The wild mountain valleys of Yugoslavia are dotted 
with about eighty fairly large lakes and many smaller 
ones. The largest is Lake Scutari (called Skadarsko in 
Yugoslavia), which extends across the border into .Al- 
bania. Lake Prespa and nearby Lake Ohrid. also in 
southern Yugoslavia, are nearly as large as Scutari. 
Yugoslavia shares Lake Ohrid with .Albania, and Lake 
Prespa with .-Xlbania and Greece. 

Climate. The Adriatic coast of Yugoslavia has a 
mild and sunny climate, much like that of Italy. The 
weather rarely gets extremely hot or extremely cold. 
Rain falls heavily in the spnng and fall. The southern 
coastal area has about 65 inches of rain a year. The 
Danube valley has a humid climate. It is hot and moist 
in the summer, and cold and snowy in the winter. The 
mountain valleyr in southeastern Yugoslavia have hot 
and dn.' summers and cold winters. 

Natural Resources. Yugoslavia has valuable mineral 
resources. It is a leading country in Europe in pro- 
ducing antimony, lead, and bauxite, the ore from 
which aluminum is made. It also produces important 
amounts of copper, mercun.-. and zinc, and has rich 
chromium, coal, and iron deposits. 

More than one third of \'ugoslavia is covered with 
forests. For many years, the oak, fir, and beech trees 




Yufroslav Inrormatlon Center 

Ttie Slovenian Alps are Yugoslavia's winter playground. Indi- 
vidual sports such as skiing are especially popular in the country, 

were cut down and shipped out of the country faster 
than they could grow back. But in 1929 the govern- 
ment began forest consci^vation programs. 

The many rivers in Yugoslavia could produce great 
amounts of electric po\\er. and several hydroelectric 
developments are under construction. 

The People and Their Work 

The People. Most of the people of Wigoslavia are 
South Slavs. 1 hey form a branch of the Slavic familv of 
peoples who live in eastern Europe and northwestern 
Asia. Three different languages are spoken in Yugo- 
slavia, and tw o ditferent alphabets are used. Three dif- 
ferent religious faiths are found in the country. 

The Yugoslavs are divided into Serbs. Croats, Slo- 
venes, Montenegrins, and Macedonians. The Serbs 
live in Serbia. Banat, most of Hercegovina. and parts of 
Bosnia. Usually, Serbs are dark-skinned, with dark hair 
and eyes. The Croats occupy Croatia, the coastal land 
called Dalmatia. and tlie rest of Bosnia. Most C:roats 
are fairly short, and many of them are blond. The 
Slovenes live in Slovenia, in northern Yugoslavia. They 
resemble their neighbors, the .\ustrians. Typical Slo- 
venes are short and have light hair and eyes. The 
Montenegrins, who live in Montenegro, north of .\1- 
bania, are among the tallest and heaviest people in 
Europe. The Macedonians live in Macedonia, and in 
parts of Greece and Bulgaria, 

Language is a dividing factor in Yugoslav life. The 
countiy has three separate languages: Serbo-Croatian, 
Slovenian, and Macedonian, which has both .Serbian 
and Bulgarian elements. These languages are similar to 
each other. Together, they form the South Slavic lan- 
guage group. But each language has its own distinctive 
qualities, and each has several dialects. The Serbs, 
Croats, and Montenegrins all speak Serbo-Croatian, 

481 



YUGOSLAVIA MAP INDEX 



Historical Regions 

DALMATIA C 2 

SLAVONIA B 3 

Republics 

BO$N(A-HERCEGO- 
VINA IBOSNA I 
HERCEGOVINA) B 3 
Pop 3.274.886 

CROATIA 

(HRVATSKA) B 2 

Poo 4,148.122 

MACEDONIA 

IMAKEDOMJA) D 5 
Pop 1.404,883 

MONTENEGRO 

(CRNA GORA) C 4 
Pop. -471.433 

SERBIA (SRBIJA) C 5 
Pop 7.B29.II3 

SLOVENIA 

(SLOVENIJAI B 2 

Poo. 1.584.31.8 

Cities 

Ada. 11.534 B 5 

Aleksinac. 8.741 . . .C 5 

Apatin. 17.203 B 4 

Baika Pianka, 

16,487 B 4 

BaikaTopola,IS,0S7 B 4 

Baimok, 11,716 . . B 4 

Bakar, 2.026 B 2 

BaniaLuka. 50.463 B 3 

Bar. 2.163 C 4 

Baska. 1.016 B 2 

Becei. 24.854 8 5 

Bcia Crkva. 10.749 B 5 
Belgrade f Beograd). 

587.899 B 5 

Benkovac. 1.367 .8 3 
Beograd. see Belgrade 

Bihac. 15.552 8 2 

Biicliina. 17.502 B 4 

Bijelo Pollc. 5.807 C 4 

Bileca. 2.489 C 4 

Bitola. 49.101 D 5 

Bielovar. 15.637 .83 

Blato. 5.140 C 3 

Bled. 4.120 A 2 

Bor. 18.612 B 6 

Bosanska Dubica. 

6.253 B 3 

Bosanska Gradiska. 

6.373 8 3 

Bosanska Kostajnica. 

2.037 8 3 

Bosanski Novi. 7.082 B 3 
Bosanski Petrovac. 

3.374 B 3 

Bosanski Samac. 

3.607 8 4 

Brfko. 17.834 B 4 

BreSice. 2.625 B 2 

Brinie. 997 8 2 

Brod. 28.729 8 4 

Bugoino. 5.411 B 3 

Buzet. 444 8 I 



Caiak. 27.356 C 5 

Cainice. 1.051 C 4 



Cakovec. 9.647 
Caiibrod. see 

Dtmitrovgrad 
Celic. 16.487 - 
Cerknica. 1.404 
Celinje. 9.345 . . 
Crikvenica. 3.637 
CrnomelJ. 2.326 
Curug. 9,457 . - - 
Danilov Grad. 1.373 
Daruvar. 6.280 
Debar. 6.341 
Derventa. 9.795 



A 3 

A 2 

B 2 

C 4 

B 2 

B 2 

B 4 

C 4 

B 3 

D 5 

B 3 



Dimitrovgrad (Caribrod). 

3.669 6 

OJakovica. 20.741 C 5 
Diakovo. 12.069 .84 

Djurdjevac. 6.408 A 3 

Doboj. 13.445 8 4 

Domanovici. 1.900 C 3 

Donjj Vakuf. 3.756 B 3 

Dravograd. 2.13! .A 2 

Oubrovnik. 22.961 C 4 

Ouvno. 1.610 C 3 
Fiunie. see Rijeka 

Foia. 6.762 C 4 

Gacko. 1.227 ,C 4 
Garesnica. 2.332 , .83 

Glamoc. 986 8 3 

Gnjilane. 12.508 C 5 
Gornji Milanovac. 

4.493 8 5 

Gospic. 6.857 .8 2 

Gostivar. 12.776 ,D 5 

Gracac. 2.831 8 2 

GraJanica. 7.668 .8 4 

Gradaiac. 5.897 .8 4 
Gur^ (part of 

Oubrovnik) ,C 4 

Gusinje. 2.757 ,C 4 

Hcrcegnovi. 2.536 , C 4 

Idriia. 6.024 A 2 

Imotski. 3.785 C 3 

Ivangrad. 7.020 C 4 

Ivanic Grad. I. Ill B 3 

Jaicc. 6.839 8 3 

Kaniiia. 10.709 . A 5 

Kardeljevo. 57 ... C 3 

Karlobag. 403 .8 2 

Karlovac. 39.803 . B 2 

Kiievo. 10.273 D 5 

Kikinda. 33.906 8 5 

Kliuf. 2.322 B 3 

Knin. 5.112 8 3 

KoJani. 10.986 D 6 

Koievie. 5.760 8 2 

Konjic. 5.891 ,C 3 
Koprivnica. 1.329 .A3 
Kosovska Mitrovica. 

26.620 C 5 

Kotor. 4.833 C 4 

Kotor Varos. 2.898 B 3 

Kragujevac. 52.491 .8 5 

Kraljevo. 20.409 C 5 

Kranj. 21.354 A 2 

Kratovo. 2.401 C 6 

Kirva Palanka. 2.848 C 6 



Kriievci. 6.498 A 3 

Krsko. 629 8 2 

Krusevac. 22.140 C 5 

Krusevo. 4.099 , .0 5 

Kula. 13.612 8 4 

Kumanovo. 30.734 C 5 
Kursumlija. 3.392 C 5 

Kutina. 7.132 B 3 

Labin. 6.152 B 2 

Leskovac. 33.941 , C 5 

Lioik. 1.562 8 3 

Livno. 5.170 C 3 

Ljubljana. 133.386 A 2 
LIubuski. 2.181 C 3 

Loznica. 10.61 I 8 4 

Maglaj. 4.579 .84 

Maglic. 2.182 C 5 

Makarska. 3.637 C 3 

Maribor. 82.387 A 2 

Metkovic. 4.488 C 3 

Mol. 8.079 8 5 

Mostar. 35.242 C 3 

Murska Sobota. 

6.562 A3 

Nasice. 4.157 8 4 

Negotin. 8.639 B 6 

Nevesinie. 2.272 C 4 

Niksic. 20.165 C 4 

Nis. 81.073 C 5 

Nova Varos. 3.186 C 4 
Novi Pazar. 20.712 C 5 
Novi Sad. 102.385 B 4 
Novigrad. 531 8 2 

Novo Mesto. 6.844 B 2 
Ogulin. 3.519 . 8 2 

Ohrid. 16.626 5 

Osiiek. 71.843 8 4 

Otoiac. 3.517 8 2 

PaniSevo. 40.740 B 5 

Paracin. 15.627 . C 5 

Pazin. 3.004 B I 

Pec. 28.297 C 5 

Pehievo. 1.750 D 6 

Petrinja. 7.345 8 3 

Petrovgrad. sec 

Zrenjanin 
Pirano. 5.464 8 1 

Pirol. 18.585 C 6 

Plevlja. 10.240 ,C 4 

Porei. 2.992 8 1 

Postolna. 4.848 8 2 

PoSarevac. 24,293 .85 

Priboi. 5.501 C 4 

Priiedor. 11.632 , , .8 3 

Prijcpolje. 4.627 4 

Prilep. 37.486 D 5 

Pristina. 38.891 .0 5 

Prizren. 28.050 , C 5 
Prokuolje. 13.690 .05 

Prozor. 1.550 C 3 

Ptui. 7.367 A 2 

Pula (Pola). 36.838 8 I 
Punat. 1.900 B 2 

Rata Kragujevatka. 

1.000 8 5 

Radovis. 6.195 D 6 

Raika. 2.290 C 5 

Rijeka (Fiume). 

100.339 8 2 

Rogatica. 3.044 C 4 



Rovinj. 7.156 8 1 

Ruma. 19.570 B 4 

Sabac. 30.231 8 4 

Sarajevo. 142.423 C 4 

Senj. 3.909 8 2 

Senta. 24.987 B 5 

Sibenik. 26.253 C 2 

Sinj. 4.133 C 3 

Sisak. 26.466 8 3 

Sjenica. 5.499 C 5 

^fkofja Loka. 3.367 A 2 
Skooie. 161.983 C 5 

Skradin. 928 C 2 

Slavonska Pozega. 

13.112 B 3 

Slunj. 1.260 8 2 

Smederevo. 27.104 ..8 5 
Sombor. 37.802 ... .8 4 

Solit. 99.462 C 3 

Srbobran. 14.392 8 4 

Sremska Mitrovica. 

20.790 8 4 

Sremski Karlovci. 

6.383 8 4 

Slip. 18.650 P 6 

Stolac. 2.950 C 3 

Struga. 6.871 D 5 

Strumica. 15.978 . . .D 6 
Subotica. 74.832 . ..A 4 
Susak (part of 

Rijeka) 8 2 

Svilajnac. 5.905 .8 5 

Tesanj. 3.150 B 3 

Tetovo. 25.203 D 5 

Titograd. 29.043 ,C 4 

Titov Veles. 26.618 ,D 5 
Titovo Uiice. 20.069 C 4 
Tolmin. 1.638 A 1 

Travnik. 9.984 8 3 

Trebinje. 4.072 C 4 

Trogir. 4.995 ... C 3 

Trstenik. 5.577 C 5 

Tuzla. 37.673 8 4 

Ulcinj. 5.639 D 4 

Valjevo. 22.070 8 4 

Varazdin, 26.239 .A3 

Vares. 7.688 8 4 

Vinkovci. 23.113 . .B 4 

Vir-Pazar. 323 C 4 

Virovitica. 14.027 .8 3 

Vis. 2.844 C 3 

Visegrad. 3.316 C 4 

Visoko. 7.461 C 4 

Vitanovac. 1.127 ...05 
Vlasenica. 3.047 , ,B 4 
Vlasotinci. 5.924 . , .0 B 

Vranje. 16.457 C 5 

Vrbas. 19.272 B 4 

Vrsac. 31.551 . ..8 5 
Vukovar. 25.826 8 4 

Zadar. 25.132 B 2 

Zagreb. 427.319 .82 

Zajecar. 18.545 C 6 

Zenica. 32.552 B 3 

Zepie. 2.709 8 4 

Zrenjanin (Petrovgrad). 

48.954 8 5 

Zvornik. 5.438 B 4 



Physical Features 

Bega Canal 8 5 

Bisevo (Isl.) C 2 

Bosna R 8 3 

Brat (Isl.) 3 

Brcgalnica R 6 

Cape Kamenjak . . . B I 

Cazma R. 8 3 

Cetina R C 3 

Cres (Isl.) 8 2 

Crna R D 5 

Dinaric Alps (Mts.) 8 3 
Djaravica ( Mtn.) . C 5 

Drava R B 4 

Drina R. 8 4 

Dugi (Isl.) B 2 

Dunav (Danube) R. B 5 
Durmitor (Mtn.) , .C 4 
Hvar (Isl.) .0 3 

Ibar R 5 

Iron Gate (Pass) . 8 6 
Istrian Peninsula .81 
Julian Alps (Mts.) .A 2 

Kapela Mts B 2 

Karawanken Mts. A 2 

Kori:ula (Isl.) 3 

Kornat (Isl.) C 2 

Krk (Isl.) B 2 

Krka R C 3 

Kupa R 8 2 

Kvarner (Gulf) 8 2 

Lake Dojran . . D 6 

Lake Ohrid 5 

Lake Prespa 5 

Lake Scutari C 4 

Lastovo (Isl.) C 3 

Losinj (Isl.) 8 2 

Midzhiir (Mtn.) . C 6 

Mljet (Isl.) C 3 

Morava R C 6 

Mulat (Isl.) . . .8 2 

Mura R A3 

Neretva R C 4 

Nisava R 6 

Otok (Isl.) 2 

Pag (Isl.) 8 2 

Pakra R 8 3 

Palagrui^ads.) C 3 

Perister (Mtn.) ... .0 5 

Rab (Isl.) 8 2 

Raska R 5 

Sar Planina (Mts.) .0 S 

Sava R 8 4 

Solta (Isl.) 3 

Susac (Isl.) C 3 

Susak (Isl.) 8 2 

Tamis R 8 5 

Timok R 6 

Tisa R 8 5 

Toolica R C 5 

Triglav (Mtn.) A I 

Una R 8 3 

Unije (Isl.) B 2 

Vardar R 5 

Velebif Mts 8 2 

Velika R D 5 

Vis (Isl.) 3 

Vrbas R 8 3 

Zapud Morava R. ..0 5 
Zrmanja R B 2 



Source: Latest available official figures. 



Yugoslav state Tourist Office 



i^ 




Oubrovnik, a Resort City, 

is on the Adriatic Sea. It is a fa- 
vorite tourist attraction because 
of its mild climate and its 
medieval architecture. 




The Danube Plain is one of the richest forming areas in 
Europe. Farmers in the valleys of the Danube and its branches 
raise livestock and produce most of Yugoslavia's grain crops. 

But the Croats write their language with the Roman 
alphabet, while the Serbs and Montenegrins write it 
with the Cyrillic alphabet. 

Food. The Yugoslavs love highly seasoned food, and 
much of it is greasy. The national dish of Yugoslavia 
is prase, a suckling pig roasted over hot ashes. In the 
Moslem parts of the country, the people eat lamb or 
veal instead of pork. Other specialties include cevapcici, 
mixed meats, hashed together into a roll and roasted, 
and culbastija, a grill of pork or beef. The Yugoslavs 
like to drink wine or brandy with most meals. 

Recreation. Sports events are popular throughout 
Yugoslavia. Soccer, track, and skiing events draw large 
audiences. Basketball has become popular in recent 
years. Yugoslav soccer and tennis teams have starred 
in many European contests, and mnners and swimmers 
have made good showings. One of the most popular 
games is chess. Thousands of Yugoslavs play chess. 

Cities. Belgrade is the capital and largest city. It has 
modern buildings and large industries, including the 
manufacture of textiles and leather. Zagreb, the second 
largest city, is the financial and trading center of Yugo- 
slavia. Rijeka (Fiume) is an important port that 
manufactures leather, tobacco goods, machinery', and 
chemicals. See the separate articles on Yugoslav cities 
in the Related Articles at the end of this article. 

Agriculture. About five out of every ten persons 
in Yugoslavia are farm workers. The cominunist gov- 
ernment experimented unsuccessfully with collective 
farming in the 1940's and early I950"s. But since 
1953, most farms had been returned to individual 
owners. A Yugoslav farmer cannot own over about 25 
acres of fertile land or about 37 acres of poor land. 

Yugoslavia's best farmland is in the Danube Valley. 
The rest of the soil is too poor to yield good crops. 

482b 



Yugoslavia's chief agricultural products are wheat, 
oats, barley, and corn. Farmers in the Danube Plain 
grow most of Yugoslavia's grain crops. In the hills, 
farmers raise plums and other fmits. Olives and grapes 
grow on the coast and on the many islands. Other farni 
products include tobacco, sugar beets, hemp, flax, hops, 
potatoes, and fodder crops. Great numbers of cattle, 
horses, goats, and pigs are raised. 

Mining. Yugoslavia's many mineral resources form 
the basis for mining and ore processing, its most im- 
portant industries. It is one of Europe's leading coun- 
tries in mining bauxite, lead, and antimony and ranks 
high in copper, mercury, and zinc production. 

Manufacturing. Most of Yugoslavia's heavy indus- 
tries are centered in the western part of the country. 
Slovenia and Bosnia produce iron and steel, and fur- 
niture is made in Croatia. Yugoslav carpets are made of 
pure wool and are dyed by secret processes handed 
down from past generations. Craftsmen in many parts 
of the country make and sell beautiful leather, wood, 
and metal products. Many families make their own 
clothes and household furnishings. 

Under the communists, factories are run by workers' 
councils. The councils discuss how the business is run, 
offer suggestions, and make criticisms and complaints. 
Communist party members usually nm the councils. 

Transportation and Communication. Yugoslavia has 
1 ,282 miles of navigable rivers. These provide means for 
travel and for transporting freight in the northeastern 
part of the country. There also are several long canals 
connecting the main rivers. Railroads connect the prin- 
cipal cities. A few good highways have been built. The 
best of these is the Belgrade-Zagreb Highway, com- 
pleted in 1950. The airplane has made possible quick 
transportation to remote parts of Yugoslavia. 

Several large radio stations and many smaller ones 
serve Yugoslavia. The government runs the telephone, 
telegraph, and mail services. 

Trade. Yugoslavia imports machinery and equip- 
ment, food, textiles, metals, petroleum, and electric 
machines and appliances. It exports vegetables and 
other foods, metals and mineral ores, wooden and wicker 
products, and livestock. 

Social and Cultural Achievements 

Education is one of the greatest problems in Yugo- 
slavia. The country has so many dialects that it is 
difficult to provide uniform educational facilities in all 
parts of the country. The law requires children between 
the ages of seven and fifteen to go to school. A child 
may attend primary school for eight years. Or he may 
go to a primary school for four years, then spend eight 
more years in a lyceum. which combines the work of late 
primary grades with high school. The students in ly- 
ceums get intensive training in their own language. 
They also begin studying another modern language in 
their first year at the lyceum. They begin studying a 
second modern language in their fourth year at the 
lyceum. Schools emphasize geography, history, and 
science. There are many schools for minority groups. 

There are nearly 100 higher schools, institutes, and 
academies in Yugoslavia. These schools offer advanced 
training to nearly 57,000 students a year. 

The Arts of Yugoslavia reflect the complex racial and 
religious background of its peoples. Few other parts of 



On Market Day, farm women from the sur- 
rounding area bring fresh produce to town and 
exchange it for items mode in local industries. 



The Gusle is the notional in- 
strument of Yugoslavia. It has a 
horsehair string stretched over 
a parchment sounding board. 





Unitud Prtss Int.; Bakal. Pix 



Europe can show such a variety of artistic traditions. 
The coastal region has always been greatly influenced 
by Italy and by Italian art. Croatia and Slovenia have 
been more closely bound to the art and culture of 
Austria, Hungary, and central Europe. Yugoslavia has 
many skilled weavers, woodcutters, and stone cai-vers. 

One of the best-known Yugoslav artists was the sculp- 
tor, Ivan Mestrovic (1883-1962). He was born in 
Croatia. In 1946, he moved to the United States. Oton 
Zupancic (1878-1949) became known as the national 
poet of Slovenia. One of the outstanding Yugoslav 
composers is Stjepan Sulek (1914- ), a Croat who 
first became prominent as a violinist. 

Religion. Out of every 100 Yugoslavs, about 47 be- 
long to the Eastern Orthodox Church, about 36 are 
Roman Catholics, and 1 1 are Moslems. There are a few 
Protestants, most of whom live in Slovenia. 

Since 1946, the communist government has had a 
bitter quarrel with the Roman Catholic Church. The 
communists tried Archbishop Aloysius Stepinac as a 
war criminal in 1946. The Vatican charged that this 
trial was part of an organized persecution of Yugoslav 
Catholics, .\fter Stepinac was imprisoned, the Vatican 
made him a cardinal. In 1952, Yugoslavia broke 
diplomatic relations with the Vatican. 

Government 

Notional Government is a communist dictatorship 
%vith most power in the hands of the president. The 



government is ruled by the leaders of the Yugoslav 
Communist party, called the Socialist Alliance of tlie 
Working People of Yugoslavia. All high officers of the 
government are Communist party leaders. The 670- 
member federal assembly (parliament) is divided into 
five chambers. The federal chamber, largest of these, 
debates all proposed legislation, and must approve bills 
before they become law. The other four chambers 
specialize in legislation dealing with the economy, 
social welfare, political administration, and health, 
culture, and education. \'oters elect members of dis- 
trict assemblies, who in turn elect the parliament mem- 
bers. A federal executive council (cabinet), headed by a 
premier, runs the government. The council members 
are appointed by the president of the republic with 
approval of the federal chamber. 

The constitution, adopted in 1963, makes Marshal 
Tito president for life. .■\11 succeeding presidents will be 
elected by members of the parliament. They will be 
limited to two four-year terms in office. 

All men and women over 18 are allowed to v'ote and 
can be elected to public offices. But, ballots contain 
only one list of communist candidates who run for 
office without opposition. 

Yugoslavia is divided into six administrative areas 
called republics. They are Bosnia-Hercegovina, Croatia, 
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, and .Slovenia. Serbia 
includes an autonomous province, Vojvodina, and an 
autonomous region, Kosovo-Metohija. Both areas con- 
tain large non-Serbian minorities. 

Local Government is mn by People's Committees in 
die villages and towns. Communist leaders usually 



YUGOSLAVIA 

maintain strict control of these People's Committees. 
History 

Before Yugoslavia became a separate countrx'. it was 
divided among Austria-Hungar\'. Bulgaria. Monte- 
negro, and Serbia. The Ottoman Turks had niled much 
of the area for many years. For the histoiy of this area 
before 1918, see the History sections of the articles 
Austria-Hungary; Bosnia and Hercegovina; Mace- 
donia; Montenegro; Serbia; and Turkey. See also 
Balkans; World War I. 

Manv of the complicated racial and religious divisions 
in modern Yugoslavia can be understood in relation to 
the history of the South Slavs. The peoples of Croatia 
and Slovenia were ruled for more than 1,000 years by 
Austrian and Hungarian Roman Catholics. These 
gioups became Roman Catholic, and write their lan- 
guages with the Roman alphabet. But the Serbs are 
closely related to the Croats and speak the same lan- 
guage. The Serbs accepted the Eastern Orthodo.x 
faith, and write their language with the Cyrillic alpha- 
bet. Many people in Bosnia, Hercegovina, Montenegro, 
and Macedonia became Moslems during the rule of the 
Ottoman Turks. 

Afier World War I, in which .Austria-Hungary was 
defeated, Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia, and Hercegovina 
joined the Kingdom of Serbia in a united kingdom. 
The Montenegrins deposed their king and joined the 
new country, which \s as called the Kingdom oj the Serbs. 
Croats, and Slovenes. The new kingdom was officially 
proclaimed on Dec. 1, 1918. 

A constitution was adopted in 1921, providing for a 
constitutional monarchy. But the racial and religious 
divisions in the country made real unity difficult. Until 
1924, the new kingdom disputed with Italy over posses- 
sion of the port of Fiume (Rijeka). Italy won the city, 
but Yugoslavia kept part of the port (see Rijeka). 

Royal Dictatorship. In January, 1929, King Alex- 
ander dismissed the parliament and set up a personal 
dictatorship. Late in 1929, the countiy's name was 
changed to Yugoslavia. Most of the Yugoslavs, e.xcept 



RED-LETTER DATES IN YUGOSLAVIA 



1918 Serbia took the lead in setting up the Kingdom of 

the Serbs, Croats, and .Slovenes under .\lexander I. 
1929 The name of the country was changed to Yugo- 
slavia. 
1934 .Alexander I was assassinated and a regency was 

set up. 
1941 (March 27) The army overthrew the pro-German 

Government and Peter II became king. 

{.April 6) Germany invaded Yugoslavia. 
1943 Resistance leaders worked out a federal form of 

government for postwar- Yugoslavia. 
1945 Tito, a communist leader, became premier. The 

country became a republic. 
1948 The Cominform denounced Yugoslav communists 

as tools of the Western Powers. The Soviet Union 

broke off relations with Yugoslavia. 
1950 The United States began sending supplies to 

Yugoslavia. 
1953 Yugoslavia joined a military defense pact with 

Greece and Turkey. 
1955 Top Soviet leaders visited Yugoslavia in an effort 

to win the country back as a satellite. 
1963 A new constitution made Tito the president for 

life. 

484 



the .Serbs, thought that .Alexander's changes were 
planned to put the rest of the kingdom under Serbian 
rule, and they objected violently. 

King .Alexander issued a new constitution in 1931. It 
was supposed to restore a democratic government, but 
the new constitution gave greater powers to the king. 
and did not allow political parties to operate. On 
October 9, 1934, .Alexander was assassinated in Mar- 
seille, France, by Croat nationalists. Three regents were 
appointed to mle the kingdom until .Mexander's eleven- 
year-old son. Peter II. should come of age. Prince Paul. 
Alexander's brother, was the real mler of the country. 

World War II. In October. 1940, Italy invaded Greece 
from bases in .Albania. The Greeks drove the Italians 
out and invaded .Albania before Germany could come 
to Italy's aid. Germany wanted to send troops through 
Yugoslavia. Prince Paul, faced with pro-German pres- 
sure from some Yugoslav leaders, finally gave in to the 
Gennans. On March 25, 1941, Yugoslavia joined the 
Axis. The army ousted the pro-fascist government on 
March 27. King Peter II was declared of age, although 
he was only 1 7. He took the lead in the new government. 

President Franklin Roosevelt said that March 27 was 
"the turning point in Hitler's fate." Hitler had planned 
to invade Russia on May 15. Instead, he had to wait 
until June 22, after he had ■'destroyed" Yugoslavia and 
Greece. After the Yugoslav army surrendered, the Ger- 
mans set up small puppet states in the country, and 
annexed many areas. The young king escaped to Lon- 
don, where he set up a government-in-exile. 

Anti-Nazi Resistance grew rapidly. Draza Mihail- 
ovich, a colonel in the_ Yugoslav army, led a group 
called the Chetniks (Cetnici). King Peter's govern- 
ment-in-exile appointed Mihailovich commander of 
the resistance movement and made him a general. But 
a communist leader, Josip Broz, who called himself 
Tito, organized a more effective force called the Parti- 
sans. The Chetniks charged that the Partisans were 
communist-dominated, and the Partisans charged that 
many Chetniks were working with Germans or Italians. 

The .Allies sent investigating missions to Yugoslavia 
in 1943 to study the quarrel between the rival resistance 
groups. The investigators concluded that Tito's Parti- 
sans were doing most of the actual fighting. The Allies 
then threw their support behind Tito. 

Tito's political influence grew as quickly as his mili- 
tary strength. By the end of the war, Tito and his sup- 
porters had all of Yugoslavia under their control. Their 
National Front coalition won 85 out of every 100 votes 
in an election in November. 1945. The newly elected 
parliament declared Yugoslavia a republic on Novem- 
ber 29, 1945. King Peter II never returned to his 
countn.'. He was formally deposed in March. 1947. 

Communist Dictatorship. Yugoslavia desperately 
needed reconstruction after four long years of enemy 
occupation, resistance, and civil war. One out of every 
nine Yugoslavs had died during the stmggle. Tito 
pushed the communist program of government con- 
trol, and set up a Five-Year Plan in 1947, designed to 
develop heavy industry and modernize agriculture. 

A Split with Moscow that developed in June. 1948, 
took the w orld by surprise. The Communist Information 
Bureau, called the Cominform. denounced Tito's gov- 
ernment and called on all loyal communists to attempt 
to overthrow it. Russia also set up a blockade of Yugo- 



I 



slavia, in an attempt to i-uin the country's economy. 
After tr\-ing for several months to rejoin the com- 
munist fold, the Yugoslavs began to criticize the type 
of communism practiced in Russia. Yugoslav commu- 
nists also changed parts of their program that followed 
Moscow's line. They decentralized the government 
and most controls over the economy. 

In the 1950's. After months of discussion, the com- 
munists revised the constitution in 1953 to make decen- 
tralization official. The government gave up much of 
its program of collective fanning, which had failed com- 
pletely to produce its quotas. Under a new economic 
system, both industry and the few remaining collective 
farms were put on a profit system. 

Yugoslavia suffered a severe drought in 1950, and the 
United .States gave the country much-needed aid. The 
industries being developed under the Five- Year Plan 
were dependent on imports. When Russia cut off these 
imports, Yugoslavia had to turn to the West. The 
United States gave Yugoslavia millions of dollars in 
direct aid, and increased its trade with the countiy. 

Yugoslavia faced serious problems because of its 
position as a communist country on the outside of the 
Iron Curtain. In 1953, at Ankara, Tito's government 
signed an alliance with Greece and Turkey, providing 
for military, economic, and cultural cooperation. The 
pact was supplemented by a pact for military' assistance 
signed at Bled, Yugoslavia, in 1954. Also in 1954, 
Yugoslavia and Italy settled the Trieste dispute that 
had existed since the end of World War II. At that 
time, the United Nations took Trieste from Italy and 
divided it into two zones. Italy was given control 
of the northern part and Yugoslavia received the 
southern part (see Trieste). 

But stiTJggles continued within Yugoslavia. Tito's 
party was threatened with a serious split when Milo\'an 
Djilas called on the one-party countiy to prove that it 
really was democratic. Djilas and Vladimir Dedijer 
wanted the government to allow a second party. Both 
men were arrested and accused of tiying to destroy 
Yugoslavia's Communist party. But, after the trial, early 
in 1955, the men were allowed to go free. 

Russia in 1955 suddenly announced that Premier 
Nikolai Bulganin and party leader Nikila Khrushchev 
would visit Belgrade. Tito's government said only that 
it wished to '"normalize" relations with Russia. The 
Belgrade meeting lasted nine days, and ended with a 
declaration by the two countries that each would respect 
the other's principles. 

In 1958, Yugoslavia settled a dispute with Russia over 
wheat by buying 200,000 tons of wheat from Russia. In 
that year, the United States extended a long-term eco- 
nomic loan to build up Yugoslavia's industry. 

In the 1960's. The government announced a five- 
year plan in 1960 aimed at increasing the countiy "s 
annual production. A new constitution adopted in 1963 
made Tito president for life. An earthquake leveled 
.Skopje in July, 1963. It killed about 2,000 persons, and 
left 100,000 homeless. Workers immediately began re- 
building the city. George Kish 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Biographies 
Adamic, Louis Mcstrovic, Ivan 

Alexander I ■ Mihailovich, Draza 

Andric, Ivo Peter I 



YUKAWA, HIDEKI 



Suppf, Franz von 
Tesla, Nikola 
Tito 



Peter II 

Rodzinski, .^rtur 
Ruzicka, Leopold 

Cities 
Belgrade Novi Sad .Sarajevo Split 

Ljubljana Rijeka Skopje Zagreb 

History 
Austria-Hungary Dalmatia Rapallo, 

Balkans Hungary (History) Treaties of 

Bosnia and Little Entente Serbia 

Hercegovina Macedonia Trieste 

Croatia and Montenegro World War I 

Sla\onia World War II 

Physical Features 
Alps Danube River Sava River 

Unclassified 
Aluminum (table) Clothing (color Leather (table) 

Chetnik picture, Europe) Marriage 

Christmas (In Corn (table) (picture) 

Yugoslavia) Lead (table) Para 

Slav 
Outline 
I. The Land and Its Resources 
II. The People and Their Work 

A. The People F. Manufacturing 

B. Ways of Life G. Transportation and 

C. Cities Communication 

D. Agriculture H. Trade 

E. Mining 

III. Social and Cultural Achievements 

IV. Government 
V. History 

Questions 

What does the name I'ugoilaiia mean? 

Where in Yugoslavia do most of the people live? 

Who were the C/ietmks? The Paiiisans? 

What is the main ri%cr of \ ugoslavia? 

What are the country's chief mineral resources? 

How many major groups of peoples live in Yugoslavia? 

Where is Yugoslavia's chief farming area? 

YUIT. .See Eskimo. 

YUKAWA, yoo KAH wah, HIDEKI (1907- ), a 
Japanese physicist, became famous for his contributions 
to theoretical nuclear physics. He won the 1949 Nobel 
prize for physics. He was the first Japanese so honored. 
He received the award for a theory he worked out in 

1935, that predicted the existence of a particle with a 
mass between that of the electron and that of the proton. 
The American physicist, Carl Anderson, did research in 
cosmic rays that provided experimental proof for Yu- 
kawa's theoiy. The particle, called the meson, was dis- 
co\'ered in 1936. 

Yukawa was born in Tokyo, and studied at Kyoto 
University. He became a lecturer at Kyoto in 1932, and 
was appointed professor there in 1939. From 1933 to 

1936, Yukawa seived as a lecturer in nuclear physics 
at Osaka L^niversity. 

Yukawa came to the United States in 1948, at the 
invitation of J. Robert Oppenheimer, to act as a visiting 
professor and work at the Institute for Advanced Study 
at Princeton, N.J. He became professor of physics at 
Columbia University in 1950. In 1953, he became the 
first director of the Research Institute for Fundamental 
Physics at Kyoto University. Yukawa wrote two books, 
Introduction to Qiuintiim Mechanics (1947), and Introduc- 
tion to I Ih-ory of E/imenlary Particles (\9^8). R. T. Ellickson 



485 




Dawson, a Boom Town During the Klondike Gold Rush, Rests in a Valley at the Mouth of the Klondike River. 



YUKON, TOO kahn, is a territory in the northwest 
corner of Canada. It lies in a vast semiarctic region. 
The Yukon is an area of long, cold winters and short, 
warm summers. Rich mineral deposits have been 
developed in the Yukon. Many prospectors hurried to 
the Yukon during the Klondike Gold Rush in 1898. 
Today, mining remains the most important industry 
in the territory. Whitehorse serves as the capital. 

The Land and Us Resources 

Location, Size, and Description. The Yukon covers 
207,076 square miles. The Map shows that tlie territory 
resembles a rough triangle. The base rests on the 
northern border of British Columbia, and the peak on 
the Arctic Ocean. Alaska lies to the west of the Yukon, 



and the Northwest Territories lies to the east. 

Ranges of the largest mountain system of North 
America almost entirely cover the Yukon Territory. 
The Rockies form part of this system, but spread out 
into smaller chains in the southeast, near the Liard 
River. The highest peaks rise in the Saint Elias Moun- 
tains in the southwest, near Alaska. Mount Logan 
(19,850 feet) is the highest point in Canada. 

The territory derives its name from the Yukon River. 
The word Yukon probably had its origin in the Indian 
word Yuchoo (big river). The Yukon River drains over 
half of the territory. Most of the rest is drained into the 
Mackenzie River through the Peel and Liard river sys- 
tems. Two bridges span the main section of the Yukon 
River. The Robert Campbell Bridge crosses the river at 



FACTS IN BRIEF 



Capital: Whitehorse. 

Government: National — member of the House of Ck)m- 
mons from the Yukon, 1. 1 eiritonal — members of the 
territorial council, 7. 

Area: 207,076 square miles (amount of inland water un- 
known). Greatest Distances: (east-west) 600 miles; (north- 
south) 666 miles. 

Elevation: Highest, Mount Logan in the Saint Elias Moun- 
tains, 19,850 feet above sea level; Lowest, sea level along 
the Beaufort Sea. 

Populotion: 14,628 (1961). Density, 1 persons per 100 
square miles. 

Chief Products: Mining, silver, gold, lead, zinc. Manufac- 



turing and Processing, lumber and lumber products, soft 
drinks, printing, cement products. Fur Industry, mar- 
ten, beaver, muskrat, mink, squirrel, lynx, fox. Fishing 
Industry, whitefish, lake trout. 

Territorial Coat of Arms: The crest displays a malamute 
dog, an animal important in early Yukon history. The 
wavy blue vertical stripe in the center of the shield 
represents the Yukon River. The red "steeples" repre- 
sent the mountainous country, and the gold balls 
symbolize the Yukon's mineral resources. The St. 
George's Cross refers to the early explorers and fur 
traders from England. The circular ligure in the 
center of the cross is a symbol of the fur trade. 

Territorial Flower: Fireweed. 



486 




)^*rfi.-/«.. 



» .' 











\ 'f- ^.. Calrcross 
* vlls"' ^ BRITISH COLUMBIA 



120° 



by Band McNally for WORLD BOOK 



i 



Whitehorse, and the Carmacks Bridge spans it at the 
city of Carmacks. River steamers can travel almost 
1,800 miles on the river from Whitehorse to the Bering 
Sea. 

Natural Resources. The Yukon Territory has large 
deposits of asbestos, coal, copper, gold, lead, nickel, 
silver, and zinc. Valuable forests of white spruce cover 
much of the Yukon. Other trees include birch, fir, pine, 
and poplar. The fireweed is the territorial flower. 

Varieties of almost all fur-bearing animals can be 
found in the Yukon. The territory's animals include 
bear, caribou, Dall (white) sheep, moose, and moun- 
tain goats. Among the game birds in the Yukon are 
grouse, ptarmigan, and waterfowl. Grayling, northern 
pike, and lake and rainbow trout swim in Yukon 
streams and lakes. 

Climate. Temperatures in the Yukon vary greatly. 
.Average January' temperatures are 5° F. at Whitehorse 
and — 16° F. at Dawson. The coldest temperature ever 
recorded in North America was — 81°F., at Snag Air- 
port near the Alaska border. .Summer temperatures 
average from 50° F. in the north to &lt;~)0° F. in the south. 
A high of 95° F. has been recorded at both Dawson and 
Mayo. Annual snowfall varies from 40 inches in the 
north to over 80 inches in the south. Average annual 
rainfall in the Yukon ranges from 9 to 13 inches. 

The People and Their Work 

The People. The Yukon has a population of 14,628. 
Most of the inhabitants are white, but the number 



also includes about 2,000 Indians, about !50 Asiatics, 
and less than 50 Eskimos. The majority of the Yukon's 
people live in the Whitehorse area. Most of the rest 
live near mining camps. Almost all of the people speak 
English. 

Way of Life. The people of the Yukon must wear 
warm clothing in order to survive the cold winters. 
Some people bank the side walls of their homes with 
snow during the winter to provide added insulation 
from the cold. But in the many modern, well-insulated 
houses having basements and force-draft oil furnaces, 
this is not necessary. Daily air and trucking services 
bring perishable foods to the territory. Shipments of 
food arrive by ocean steamer from \'ancouver, B.C., 
and Skagway, Alaska, every two weeks. 

Cities. Whitehorse (pop. 5,031) serves as the terri- 
toiy's capital. Many of its residents work in the De- 
partment of Public Works, which maintains the Yukon 
section of the Alaska Highway. Other Yukon setde- 
ments and their populations include Dawson (881), 
Watson Lake (597), Mayo (342), Teslin (231), Car- 
macks (218), Carcross (175), and Pelly Crossing (151). 

Mining. Most of the people in the Yukon work in the 
mining industry. For many years after the Klondike 
Gold Rush, gold mining ranked as the chief industry. 
By the mid-1900's, it had been surpassed by the mining 
of ores containing lead, silver, and zinc. Deposits of 
these ores lie about 40 miles north of Mayo. The ores 
are processed in the Yukon and shipped to a smelter at 
Trail, B.C. .\nnual value of mineral products in the 

487 



- ' ^M^w-4--i«~ 






1950"s totaled more than $14,000,000. Oil and gas 
were discovered in the northern Yukon in 1959. 

Agriculture. Because of the short summer, agriculture 
is of little importance, except for the production of 
quick-growing vegetables. The Canadian government 
maintains an experimental farm along the Alaska 
Highway. Barley, oats, and wheat have been grown 
successfully on the farm. Excellent vegetables can be 
grown in greenhouses during the long hours of sun in 
the earl)' spring and summer. 

Tourism. Every year, thousands of people travel 
across the Yukon Territory on the Alaska High%vay. The 
'Wikon section is considered by many to be the most 
scenic portion of the entire highway. Tourists also 
visit the Yukon to see the scenes of the famous Klon- 
dike Gold Rush. Dawson has preserved many land- 
marks of that era. Many visitors to the Yukon have 
read the works of Robert William Service, who wrote 
his first famous poems in Whitehorse. The MacBride 
Museum at Whitehorse is another tourist attraction. 

Transportation and Communication. The White 
Pass &amp; 'i'ukon Route railway stretches for about 1 10 
miles from Whitehorse south to Skggway, Alaska. 
Boats sail regularly from Skagway to Vancouver, B.C. 
Several airlines serve the Whitehorse airport. The 
Alaska Highway extends for about 600 miles through 
the Yukon. Bus sei'vice provides connections to cities in 
Alaska, Alberta, and British Columbia. The Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation has a radio station at White- 
horse. Automatic relays transmit its programs to nearly 
all of the people in the Yukon. Whitehorse has one 



Rugged Miners, left, packed their belongings in sleds and 
hurried to the gold fields during the Klondike Gold Rush in 1898. 

Wliitehorse, tlie Capital of the Yukon, is the largest town 

in the territory. It is the center of an important mining region. 



Brown Bros; Canadian Government Travel Bureau 



Mjti mt» 











television station. Telephone and telegraph seivice are 
provided in most parts of the Yukon. 

Education and Social Services 

Education. The territorial government maintains 
schools at the population centers of the Yukon. There 
are public high schools (grades 9 through 12) in Mayo, 
Watson Lake, Dawson, and Whitehorsc. Whitchorse 
also has a grade 13 (first-year university). The curricu- 
lum follows that of the British Columbia school system. 
1 he Roman Catholic Church operates separate schools 
in Dawson and Whitchorse. Indian children may at- 
tend public or private schools, or they may attend the 
Indian residential school in Carcross. Both public and 
private schools are financed by the government. 

Social Services. Resident doctors live at Dawson, 
Mayo, Elsa, and Whitchorse. Resident dentists have 
offices at Whitchorse and visit other settlements periodi- 
cally. Nurses travel through the territoiy. Dawson, 
Mayo, and Whitchorse have hospitals. 

Government 

The Canadian government appoints a commissioner 
for the Yukon. He serves an indefinite term as the 
executive officer of the territorial government. A seven- 
member territorial council assists the commissioner. 
Members are elected to three-year terms. The people 
send one elected representative to the Canadian House 
of Commons. 

History 

The Yukon region was first explored in the 1840's 
by Robert Campbell, a British fur trader of the Hud- 
son's Bay Company. Campbell discovered and named 
the Pelly River and a portion of the Yukon River which 
he called the Lewes (renamed the Yukon in 1949). 
Campbell built a trading post on the Pelly River at 
Fort Selkirk in 1848. But Chilkat Indians looted and 
bmiied the post a short time later. The Yukon River 
valley remained a part of the company's fur-trading em- 
pire until 1870, when it became a part of Canada's 
Northwest Territories. 

On Aug. 17, 1896, George Carmack and his Indian 
friends made a gold strike on Bonanza Creek. This led 
to the Klondike Gold Rush of 1897 and 1898. The creek 
is a tributary of the Klondike River, near the present site 
of Dawson. Thousands of prospectors poured into the 
Yukon when news of the rich discovery reached the rest 



YUKON RIVER 

of the world. Simple methods of hand mining produced 
522,275,000 worth of gold in 1900. A fieet of gold 
dredges soon began digging gold. The dredges continue 
to extract about $2,000,000 worth of gold annually 
from the rich deposits. 

At the height of the Klondike Gold Rush in 1898, an 
estimated 35,000 persons lived in the Yukon Territory. 
Records of the North West Mounted Police (now the 
Royal Canadian Moimted Police) show that 7.080 boats 
passed down the Yukon River in 1898, carrying 28,000 
people. An estimated 5,000 people reached the gold 
fields by other routes. 

The miners who lived in the Yukon were often rough 
and unruly. At the beginning of the gold rush, a de- 
tachment of the North West Mounted Police entered 
the region to preseive order. The influx of prospectors in- 
creased the Yukon's political importance. In 1898, it 
became a territory, and Dawson became the capital. 

After much of the surface ore had been exhausted by 
simple hand-mining methods, many prospectors sold 
their claims and drifted a\va\' from the Klondike area. 
Whitchorse had railroad sei-vicc. Because of this, it be- 
came the distributing point for the entire Yukon, and 
grew more rapidly than Dawson. W'hitehorse became 
the capital in 1951. Wamer a. Wood 

Related Articles in World Book include: 



Alaska Highway 
Dawson 
Fur 

Hudson's Bay 
Clompany 



King Mountain 
Klondike 
Mount Logan 
Mount Lucania 
Service, Robert 



.Silver 
Whitchorse 
Yukon River 



YUKON RIVER is the fourth largest waterway in North 
America, and the greatest river in Alaska and the 
Canadian territory of Yukon. The river rises in Cana- 
dian soil, but two-thirds of its course is in Alaska. Its 
total length, from its mouth on the Bering Sea to its 
head%vaters in British Columbia, is 1,979 miles. This is 
about as far as the distance between New York Cilv and 
Salt Lake City, LItah, or between Montreal and Cal- 
gary in Canada. The Yukon drains more than 330,000 
square miles. About half of this area lies in Alaska. 

The Yukon is navigable for almost its entire length. 
Before World War II, wood-burning stern-wheelers 
traveled from its mouth to Dawson in the Yukon Ter- 
ritory. The Yukon was the principal transportation 
route during the early mining days of Alaska and the 



Bob &amp; Ira Spring 



A Yukon River Steamer 

was once a familiar sight 
throughout the Yukon Valley. 
But cheaper transportation 
provided by railways and air- 
freight lines have made the 
steamers obsolete. 



489 




ABCTC OCEAN 







Location Mop of the Yukon River 



famous Klondike gold rush. But decreased mining activ- 
ities and the convenience of air transportation have 
made shipping by boat unprofitable. Villagers along 
the river still use small boats to transport heavy freight 
and other necessities. The Yukon is frozen for as long 
as seven months of every year. Many of the small tribu- 
taries contain gold-bearing gravels. The eastern part 
has several hot springs. 

The Course of the Yukon. The Yukon rises from a 
series of small lakes in the extreme northwest corner of 
British Columbia. From this point, it flows northwest 
and joins the Pelly River at Fort Selkirk. The Yukon 
continues northwest past Dawson, and crosses the 
United States-Canada border near Eagle, Alaska. The 
river continues northwest to Ft. Yukon, where it begins 
flowing southwest. It makes a giant curve and flows 
northwest to empty into the Bering Sea. The Yukon 
River valley is divided into two regions, the Upper 
Wikon and the Lower \'ukon. 

Upper Yukon. The principal tributaries of the Upper 
Yukon are the Selwyn, White, Stewart, Klondike, and 
Forty-Mile rivers. The first important discoveries of 
gold in this region were made on Fort&gt;'-Mile Creek in 
1895. But these were overshadowed a few years later 
by the richness of the Klondike field. Dawson, the 
largest settlement on the Upper Yukon, and capital 
of Yukon Territory until 1951, stands at the meeting 
point of the Klondike River and the Yukon. 

After flowing northwest for 450 miles, the Yukon 
turns almost at right angles and flows southwest for 
200 miles through the famous "Flats." These are level 
areas of sand bars and low islands, covered with dense 
thickets of spruce, willow, and birch. There the river 
channel is constantly shifting, and at seasons of high 
water it increases from a normal width of 10 miles to 



more than 40 miles. The "great bend" of the Yukon 
is about 3 miles north of the Arctic Circle. 

The "Flats" come to an end at the Ramparts. This is 
a splendid gorge which extends for 110 miles to the 
mouth of the Tanana River. In this part the Yukon 
Yalley averages one to three miles in width. The Tan- 
ana, which is the Yukon's largest tributary lying 
entirely in Alaska, flows northwest for about 400 miles, 
roughly parallel to and about 125 miles west of the 
Upper Yukon. 

Lower Yukon. The Ramparts gorge ends at the 
mouth of the Fanana River. The river then enters a 
lowland about 25 miles wide. From this point to the 
sea, 800 miles away, the river valley is never less than 
two miles wide. 

The Yukon delta covers nearly 9,000 square miles. 
The river has more than 20 outlets over 600 feet wide. 
But most of them are shallow and filled with sand bars. 
Steamers enter the delta through the Aphoon Pass, 
which is only 4 feet deep at low water. Lyman e. Allen 

See also Rn'ER (chart. Longest Rivers). 

YULE, yool, is an old name for the Christmas season. 
The term comes from the Anglo-Saxon word for the 
months of December and January. The Anglo-Saxons 
called December "the former Yule," and January, "the 
after Yule." The early pagans of Scandinavian coun- 
tries held \-ule festivals near the end of each year. After 
Christianity spread into Europe, these festivals became 
Christmas celebrations. The custom of burning a yule 
log started in pagan times. The early Norsemen honored 
Thor, their god of war, by burning a yule log during 
the yule season. This custom has become part of the 
present celebration of Christmas, especially in Eng- 
land. Elizabeth Hough Sechrist 

See also Christmas. 

YUMA, TOO muh, Ariz. (pop. 23,974; alt. 140 ft.), is 
a trading center in southwestern .\rizona. It lies on the 
Colorado River opposite the site of old Fort Yuma, 
Calif, (see Arizona [political map]). The river irrigates 
suiTounding farmlands. A ferry, established here in 
1849, took emigrants across the river on their way to 
California gold fields. The town, laid out in 1854, was 
named Colorado City. Later, it was changed to ."Arizona 
City, and finally to Yuma, after the Yuma Indian tribe. 

The first railroad to enter .Arizona crossed the Colo- 
rado River at Yuma in 1877. The city is the seat of 
\'uma County. The .'Mr Force has two installations in 
Yuma. Gila and Yuma irrigation projects cover about 
165,000 acres nearby. These farmlands were opened to 
homesteaders in 1947. Yuma has a mayor-council gov- 
ernment. For monthly rainfall and temperature infor- 
mation on Yuma, see .'Krizon.'V (Climate). Alice b. Good 

YUMA PROJECT. See Irrigation (Irrigation in the 
United .States). 

YUNGA. See Bolfvia (Land Regions). 

YUNGKIA. See Wenchou. 

YURT. See Shelter (In Asia). 

YWCA. See Young Women's Christian Association. 



490 



T H 



\f^ O 



B 



Z^^^F is the 26th and last letter in our alpha- 
^ bet. Historians believe that it came 
Mll^u from a symbol used by the Semites, 
who once lived in Syria and Palestine. They named it 
zayin, and adapted an Egyptian hieroglyphic, or picture 
symbol, for an arrowlike object. The Greeks later made 
the symbol the sixth letter of their alphabet, and called 
it -c/fl. They gave it the capital -^ form which we use. 
The Romans used ^ only when writing words borrowed 
from Greek, and moved the letter to the end of their 
alphabet. In Canada and Great Britain, c is called zed. In 
some English dialects it is called izzaid. See Alphabet. 

Uses. -^ or.; is the letter least frecjuently used in books, 
newspapers, and other printed material in English. ^ is 
often used to denote the last of anything, as in the phrase 
"from A to Z." ..^ is also used to denote atomic number in 
chemistry, and zenith distance in astronomy, ^one and ^fro 
are represented by.:, which also stands for an unknown 
quantity in mathematics. 

Pronunciation. In English, a person pronounces the 
normal consonant c sound, as in zone, by placing his 
tongue blade near the edges of his upper front teeth, with 
a narrow chink left over the tip. His velum, or soft 
palate, is closed, and his breath is expelled through the 
chink and against his front teeth. 1 he vocal cords vi- 
brate. The letter c may also have a zh sound, as in 
azure OT glazier. In German, z has a ts sound. In most 
other European languages, .: sounds are like those in 
English. See Pronunciation. i. j. Gelb nnj j. m. wells 



^-^TT^y^^^'J^^t^^^ 




Afhniic Ocean 




The 26th letter took its shape from an ancient Egyptian 
symbol for on arrow or some other weapon. Its sound 
came from the Semitic word zayln, meaning weopon. 



The Romans, about A.D. 1 1 4, 
used the letter when writing 
words borrowed from Greek. 



2 



The Greeks, about 600 B.C., 
made zefa their sixth letter. 



The Small Letter z developed from 
Roman writing in the 800's. It was a 
smaller form of the capital. By the 
I 500's, it had the form we use today. 




Mediterranean Sea 



EGYPT 




SINAI 




The Phoenicians, about 1000 
B.C., used this symbol of a weapon. 



The Semites, about 1 500 B.C., 
simplified the Egyptian symbol. 



The Egyptians, about 3000 B.C., 
drew this symbol of an arrow. 



491 



ZACATECAS 

ZACATECAS, j^H ^aA TAT kahs (pop. 817,831; area 
28,125 sq. mi.), is a state on the central plateau of 
Mexico. For location, see Mexico (color map). The 
chief crops include corn, wheat, potatoes, peppers, 
and maguey. Sheep, goats, and other livestock graze 
on the plains. Mining provides the chief source of in- 
come. Zacatecas produces silver, gold, lead, and zinc. 
The city ofZacatecas is the capital. Charles C. Cumberland 

ZACHARIAS. See Elizabeth, Saint. 

ZAGREB, ~AH greb (pop. 427,319; alt. 515 ft.), is 
tlie second largest city in Yugoslavia, and the financial 
and trading center of the country. It is the capital of 
Clroatia. Zagreb stands on the Sava River, about 230 
miles northwest of Belgrade (see Yugoslavia [map]). 
The city's industries manufacture machineiy, leather, 
paper, and textiles. Joseph S. Roucek 

ZAGROS MOUNTAINS. See Iran (Land Regions). 

ZAHARIAS, BABE. Sec Didrikson, Babe. 

ZAMA, BATTLE OF. See Army (table, Famous 
Land Batdes of History); Scrpio. 

ZAMBEZI RIVER, ^am BE zih, is the fourtli largest 
river in .\frica. Only the Nile, the Niger, and the Congo 
are larger. It rises in Zambia, near the border between 
Congo (Leopoldville) and Angola. The river follows a 
winding 1,600-mile course, separating Zambia from 
Rhodesia and crossing Mozambique to empty through 
a delta into the Mozambique Channel. The Zambezi 
has many branches, and drains more than 500,000 
square miles (see Africa [map]). 

The upper course of the river lies in level land, where 
the water supply depends on equatorial rains which fall 
from October to March. From this plateau, the Zambezi 
flows down to a lower level by plunging over Victoria 
Falls, a mighty cataract of water greater than Niagara. 
A hydroelectric plant has been in operation there since 
1938. Kariba Dam, completed in 1959, lies in Kariba 
Gorge, about 200 miles downstream. The lake formed 
by this 450-foot-high dam covers 2,000 square miles. 

Early geographers knew of the Zambezi region, prob- 
ably through Arab traders. The first European to ex- 
plore the Zambezi River was David Livingstone. He ex- 
plored it in 1851, from 1853 to 1856, and from 1858 

to 1864. Harry R. Rudin 

See also Stanley and Livingstone; Victoria Falls. 

Carl Frank, Photo Researchers 




ZAMBIA is a large country in south-central .\frica. 
It is a tropical country, but its high elevation makes 
its climate relatively cool and pleasant. Zambia is 
a leading copper producer, and its wild game — such as 
giraffes, hippopotamuses, lions, and rhinoceroses — 
attracts tourists. It was the British protectorate of North- 
ern Rhodesia until it became independent on Oct. 24, 
1964. It adopted the name ^amhia for the Zambezi 
River, which flows through the cotmtiy and along the 
.southern border. Zambia's official name is the Repub- 
lic OF Zambia. Lusaka is the capital and the chief city 
of Zambia. 

Government. Zambia Is a constitutional republic. 
The president .serves as head of state. He is elected to 
a five-year term, and he appoints the vice-president 
and a cabinet of up to 14 ministers from the legislature. 
The legislature, called the National .\ssembly, has 75 
members who are elected to five-year terms. Sixty-five 
of its members are Africans, and 10 members are Euro- 
peans. All laws must be passed by the assembly and 
approved by the president. A House of Chiefs, repre- 
senting about 70 tribes, serves as an advisory- body. All 
citizens of Zambia 21 years old or more may vote. 

The countiy is divided into eight provinces. They 
are Northwestern, Western, Luapula, Northern, East- 
ern, Central, .Southern, and Barotseland. Barotseland, 
a foiTner British protectorate, is the home of the Barotse 
(Lozi) tribe. The tribe has its own laws and customs. 
Laws passed in Zambia and applied to Barotseland 
must have the consent of the people of Barotseland. 

People. Zambia has a population of 3,730,000. Most 
of the more than 3,600,000 .Africans belong to Bantu 
tribes. There are also about 75,000 Europeans and 
about 1 1 ,000 Asians and Coloreds (persons of mixed 
ancestiy). English, the official language, and Afrikaans 
are widely spoken. But most of the people speak Bantu 
languages and dialects. 

Farmers raise some corn, cassava, cotton, millet, 
peanuts, and tobacco in the Kafue valley and raise 
some cattle in Barotseland. But poor soil and the dan- 
gerous tsetse fly make it difficult to farm and raise 



FACTS IN BRIEF 



Capital: Lusaka. 

Official Language: English. 

Form of Government: Republic; 8 provinces. Head of 
Stale: President (3-year term). 

Area: 288,130 square miles. Greatest distances: (north- 
south) 700 miles; (east-west) 900 miles. 

Population: 3,730,000. Density, 13 persons per sq. mi. 

Chief Products: Agriculture, cassava, cattle, corn, cotton, 
maize, millet, peanuts, tobacco, fishing, perch, white- 
bait. Manufacturing and Processing, copper refining, fur- 
niture, iron and steel products, cement, beverages, 
mining timber, processed food, railway sleepers, saw 
milling. Alining, copper, cobalt, lead, zinc. Forest 
I'loducls, Rhodesian teak, tropical pine. 

Flog: The Hag has an orange eagle in the upper right 
corner o\er three stripes of red (for independence), 
black (for the people), and orange (for copper) on a 
field of green (for agriculture). Adopted in 1964. See 
Flag (color picture. Flags of Africa). 

Money: Baste unit, pound. For value, see Money (table). 

Lusaka Is Zambia's Most Important City. It is the natron's 
capital ond its trade and transportation center. 



ZAMBIA 



» NATIONAL CAPITAL 



OTHER CITY OR TOWN 




100 200 300 400 




cattle. As a result, most of the people live in towns in 
the copper-mining region. Zambia's largest cities in- 
clude Lusaka, Ndola, Nkana, Kitwe, Mufulira, Luan- 
shya, Broken Hill, and Livingstone. 

Missionaries provided the only education for the 
people until the late 1920's. Even today, only about 
one-third of the children of school age attend elemen- 
tary school. Few of them go on to secondary schools. 

Land. Zambia covers 288,130 square miles, much of 
it on a plateau from 3,000 to 5,000 feet above sea level. 
The Muchinga Moimtains in the northeast are over 
7,000 feet high. The Luangwa River cuts through the 
eastern part of the country, and the Kafue River flows 
through the western half. The Zambezi River rises in 
the northwest and flows south, plunging over spectacu- 
lar Victoria Falls on the Zambia-Rhodesia border. 

Lakes Bangweulu and Mweru and part of Lake Tan- 
ganyika lie in northern Zambia. Huge Kariba Lake, 
created by the Kariba Dam, covers about 2,000 square 
miles of land on the Zambia-Rhodesia border. 

Zambia has three main seasons. From September to 
November, the country is hot and diy. Temperatures 
range between 80° F. and 100° F. during the day. The 
wet season from December to April brings rainfall that 
ranges from 25 inches in the Zambezi valley and the 
Barotseland plains to 50 inches in the northwest. A 
cooler, dry period lasts from May to November. 

Economy. Zambia ranks second only to the LInited 
States as a copper producer. The mines in the Copper 
Belt along the Congo (Leopoldville) border provide 
most of the countn's income. Zambia also produces 
cobalt, and the Broken Hill mine produces lead, zinc. 



ZANESVILLE 

and manganese. The Kariba Dam hydroelectric de- 
velopment on the Zambezi provides most of the power 
that is used in the country's mines and smelters. Zambia 
and Rhodesia operate the Kariba Dam power develop- 
ment together. 

One main railroad, about 655 miles long, runs 
through Zambia. It runs through the Copper Belt, 
linking Katanga in Congo (Leopoldville) to the ports 
of Mozambique. There are about 2 1 ,500 miles of road, 
and Zambia also has airports at such cities as Lusaka, 
Livingstone, and Ndola. 

History. The first European to reach the area was 
David Livingstone, who explored the region from 1851 
to 1873. During the 1890's, Cecil Rhodes' British South 
Africa Company chartered the land north of the Zam- 
bezi. It administered the area, later knowTi as North- 
ern Rhodesia, from 1891 until it became a British 
protectorate in 1924. 

Discovery of copper in the early 1900's brought a 
rush of Europeans to the area. In 1953, Northern Rho- 
desia, Southern Rhodesia (now Rhodesia), and Nyasa- 
land (now Malawi) were grouped in the Federation of 
Rhodesia and Nyasaland. But the Africans opposed this 
because the whites retained control of the government. 
A long series of political clashes between the whites and 
Africans resulted. Great Britain finally granted a new 
constitution to Northern Rhodesia in 1962. The federa- 
tion was dissolved in 1963. 

Great Britain granted internal self-government to 
Northern Rhodesia in 1964. Kenneth Kaunda became 
the first prime minister. Later that same year, the coun- 
try became the Republic of Zambia, an independent 
member of the British Commonwealth of Nations. 
Katmda became the countiy's first president. Later in 
1964, Zambia joined the L'nited Nations. Kenneth Ingham 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Copper (tabic) Rhodesia and Nyasaland, 

Lake Bangweulu Federation of 

Lusaka Victoria Falls 

Rhodesia Zambezi River 

ZAMBOANGA, sahm boh AHNG gah (pop. 52,000; 
alt. 1 7 ft.), is one of the most beautiful cities in the 
Philippines. It lies on the western tip of Mindanao Is- 
land, 550 miles south of Manila (see Philippines [map]). 
The city serves as the chief port and trading center for a 
fertile region that produces abaca, rubber, coconuts, 
lumber, and rice. The Spaniards built a fort at Zam- 
boanga in 1 635. Zamboanga served as a Japanese base 

during World War II. RussellH. Fifield and Carlos p. Romulo 

ZAMENHOF, LAZARUS LUDWIG. See Esperanto. 

ZAMIA. See Cycad. 

ZANE'S TRACE. See Ohio (Transportation). 

ZANESVILLE, Ohio (pop. 39,077; alt. 705 ft.), is a 
trading and manufacturing center located on the Mus- 
kingum River at the mouth of the Licking River (see 
Ohio [map]). Zanesville is especially important for the 
manufacture of tile and pottery. Otlier products in- 
clude strip-rolled steel, glass, agricultural implements, 
and elecuical equipment. 

ZanesvOle was setded in 1 797. The town served as the 
state capital from 1 8 1 to 1812. Zanesville has a council- 
manager form of government. James h. rodabaugk 



493 



ZANGWILL, ISRAEL 

ZANGWILL, &lt;.-lA'G wiL ISRAEL ( 1 864-1 926), a British 
novelist and dramatist, made his reputation with the 
novel, The Children of Israel (1892), a sympathetic story 
of Jewish life. He also wrote the novels. Ghetto Tragedies 
( 1 893), and Dreamers of the Ghetto ( 1 898). He won success 
with the dramatization of The Children of Israel in 1899, 
with light comedies such as Merely Mary Ann ( 1 904), and 
with social plays such as The Melting Pot(\90S) and The 
War 6W(191 1). Zangwill was born in London, and was 
a leader in the Zionist movement. R w. Stallman 

ZANZIBAR. See Tanzani.a. 

ZANZIBAR (pop. 57,923; alt. 60 ft.) is the capital 
of Zanzibar, an island off Africa's southeastern coast. 
The island is part of Tanzania. The city exports large 
quantities of cloves. It also ships copra, chili peppers, 
and citrus fruit. Industries include the manufacture of 
soap, and clove and coconut oils. Zanzibar was founded 
in the 1500's as a Portuguese trade center. 

ZAPATA, EMILIANO (1883-1919), was a leader of 
the Mexican Revolution. He was an Indian, and his 
main objective was to gain land for his people. After 
forced service in the army, he joined the revolt in 1910 
against President Porfirio Diaz. Zapata refused to lay 
down his arms until the revolutionary leader, Francisco 
Madero, distributed land. He also refused to recognize 
Victoriano Huerta, Madero's assassin. With Francisco 
Villa, he occupied Mexico City in 1914. Zapata was 
murdered by Colonel Jesus Guajardo in 1919. He was 

born in Anenecuilco, Morelos. Donald E. Worcester 

See also Mexico (A New Constitution). 

ZAPOTEC INDIANS, SAH poh tehk, formed one of the 
main Indian groups in southern Mexico. They occu- 
pied most of the eastern half of the present state of 
Oaxaca. They developed one of the major Mexican 
civilizations, but owed many of their ideas to the Maya. 
The Zapotec farmed, followed a calendar, and used a 
form of hieroglyphic writing. Their magnificent tombs 
indicate that the Zapotec believed in an afterlife. 

Many ancient ruins in Oaxaca are attributed to the 
Zapotec. The best known site is that of Monte Alban, 
just west of the city of Oaxaca. The Zapotec built most 
of this mountaintop "city" between a.d, 1 and 900. 
Ruins include great plazas and temples, rich tombs, 
and stelae (carved stone slabs). The Mixtec, a large 
Indian group from western Oa.xaca, occupied the city 
before and after this time. Thousands of pure-blooded 
Zapotec still live in the mountain region of Oaxaca. 
They speak the Zapotec language. Gordon f. Ekholm 

ZARAGOZA. .See Saragossa. 

ZARATHUSTRA. See Zoroaster. 

ZAUDITU. .See Ethiopia (United Ethiopia). 

ZEALOT. See Simon the Canaanite, Saint. 

ZEBEDEE. .See James (Saint James the Greater); 
John the Evangelist, Saint. 

ZEBRA is a striped, horselike animal found wild in 
Africa. It stands 4 to 5 feet high at the withers. The 
zebra differs from all other members of the horse family 
because of its startling color pattern. It has parallel black 
or dark-brown stripes on a whitish background arranged 
in exact designs. These stripes run all over its bod\', 
meeting diagonally down the sides of the head. The 
lines may appear even on the zebra's long ears, short 
thick mane, and down its tail to the tuft of hair. The 



lines help to hide the zebra from its enemies. The zebra's 
chief foe is the lion. .Some kinds of zebras live on open 
grassy plains, and some in rough mountains. Zebras are 
grazing animals. They live together in small bands, each 
one of which is led by a stallion. Zebras are savage 
fighters and extremely wild. They are difficult to tame 
and train to work, because they are less gentle than 
horses and more stubborn. They are sometimes tamed in 
South Africa because they appear immune to the dis- 
ease nagana, which attacks most domesticated animals 
in Africa. Nagana is carried by the tsetse fly (see 
Tsetse Fly). 

Until a little more than a hundred years ago, great 
numbers of zebras lived over most of the eastern part of 
Africa, from southern Egypt to Cape Colony. They were 
killed for their meat and for their hides. Their meat is 
said to have an excellent taste and their hides make 
a tough leather. .Some kinds of zebras were killed off, 
and today zebras are nearly extinct. 

Scientific Classification. The zebra belongs to the horse 
family Equidae. It is genus Equus. The three species are 
E. zebra, E. bontequagga, and E.greuyi. E. lendell cockrum 

ZEBU. .See Brahman. 

ZEBULUN, ^EB yoo lun, was the name of one of the 
12 tribes of Israel. It occupied an area in southwestern 
Galilee just north of the Plain of Esdraelon. In the 
llOO's B.C., Zebulun, together with neighboring tribes, 
played a leading part in the defeat of the Canaanites by 
Deborah and Barak (Judges 4-5). Later, it was a part of 
the northern kingdom of Israel. In 733 B.C., Zebulun 
was taken by the Assyrians along with the rest of Galilee. 
Jesus' home, Nazareth, lay in what had once been the 
territory of Zebulun. Zebulun was named for the tenth 
son of Jacob, the sixth and youngest born to him by 
Leah (Genesis 30:20). The tribe claimed that it de- 
scended from him. John bright 

ZECHARIAH, zek tih RYE iih, was the name of sev- 
eral persons in the Old Testament. The name means 
the Lord remembers. Probably the best-known Zechariah 
was the prophet who lived about 520 B.C. His name is 
given to the second from the last of the Old Testament 



The Zebra's Striped Coat serves as a camouflage. It blends 
with the background, hiding them from hunters and other animals. 

Ylla, Rapho-Guillumette 




^ ..."■ '.^.Tv^^ r. j^^Sp-sv . 



494 



books in the English Bible. Zeehariah was probably 
born in Babylonian captivity, but he worked in Jerusa- 
lem. He urged the people of Jerusalem to rebuild the 
Temple, and encouraged the Jews to believe that soon 
they would be a free nation. He preached against the 
social and religious evils of his day, and related many 
visions, interpreted to him by an angel. His prophecy is 
in the first eight chapters of his book. Scholars believe 
the last chapters are later additions. Walter g.v\illi\ms 

ZED. See Zz. 

ZEDEKIAH, ZED ee Kl uh, was the last of the line of 
David to be king of Judea. His name was first Matta- 
niah, but it was changed to Zedekiah in 597 B.C., when 
he was made king by Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon. 

Later, Zedekiah rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar, 
expecting help from Egs'pt in a war against Babylon. 
But, after an 18-month siege, Nebuchadnezzar conquered 
Jerusalem in 587 B.C. Zedekiah tried to escape to the 
Jordan Valley, from where he hoped to flee into the 
desert for refuge. But he was taken prisoner, along with 
other Jewish leaders. Zedekiah's sons were killed before 
his eyes, and he was then blinded. He was taken in 
chains to Babvlon, where he died. E. A. Si'eiser 

ZEEMAN, ~jr mahn, PIETER (1865-1943), a Dutch 
physicist, became well known for his discoveries in 
spectroscopy. In 1896, he discovered what is now called 
the ^eeman effect, the splitting of spectral lines by a 
magnetic field (see ZEEM.^N Effect). The theory for this 
phenomenon was developed by Hendrik A. Lorentz, 
and the two scientists shared the 1902 Nobel prize in 
physics for their work (see Lorentz, Hendrik A.). It is 
by means of the ZeeiTian effect that astronoiners can 
measure the strength of the magnetic field on the surface 
of the sun or other stars. Zeeman was born on May 25, 
1865, at Zonnemaire, The Netherlands. R. T. Ellickson 

ZEEMAN EFFECT is the splitting up of spectrum lines 
into two or more components. It is caused by placing 
a light source in a strong magnetic field. The com- 
ponents from any one line have a set of frequencies that 
are different for every known chemical element (see 
Light [Spectrum Analysis]). These components make 
a symmetrical pattern around the original source of 
light. The patterns vary from line to line, and are plane, 
elliptically, or circularly polarized (see Polarized 
Light). h.^rvey e. white 

ZEIN. See Corn (Processing Corn). 

ZEISS, tsys, or zys, CARL (i8i 6-1888), was a German 
maker of optical instruments. He opened a small work- 
shop for making scientific instruments in Jena in 1 846. 
Twenty years later, Ernst Abbe, a teacher in Jena work- 
ing in the Zeiss shop, developed a greatly improved 
optical glass. Abbe, an excellent scientist, and Zeiss, an 
able businessman, developed the Zeiss works into the 
world's leading manufacturer of optical goods. Zeiss 
was born in Weimar. John b. mcFerrin 

ZELAN, ^E Ian, is a trade name for a water- and 
stain-resistant finish applied to various textiles. Zelan 
does not cut off circulation of air and does not change 
the normal texture of the cloth. 

ZELAYA, JOSE SANTOS. See Nicaragua (Internal 
Unrest). 

ZEMSTVO. See Russia (Reaction and Reform). 

ZEN is an intuitive school of Buddhist meditation. 
It is not a philosophy or religion in the proper sense. 
It has nothing to teach and no rituals. Zen is a method 



ZENO 

of self-training that leads to an understanding of reality. 
Its basic idea is that a person can discipline his mind 
so that he comes into touch with the inner workings of 
his being. He aiins to grasp intuitively what he cannot 
grasp rationally. This larger "awareness" cannot be 
taught. Each person must find it for himself. Zen was 
founded in China in 520 by Bodhidharma, who called 
it Clian. A Zen movement flowered in Japan in the 

lioo'sand 1200'S. George Noel Mavheu- 

ZENANA, zeh NAH nuh, is the name used in India for 
the house, or part of the house, set aside for women. 
^enana, in Persian, means belonging to women. See also 
Harem. 

ZEND-AVESTA. See Zoroastrians. 

ZENGER, JOHN PETER (1697-1746), gained the first 
major victor}' for fieedom of the press in the American 
colonies. Friends established Zenger, a printer, as editor 
and publisher of the .\'nv York Weekly Journal in 1733. 
These friends, including Chief Justice Lewis Morris, 
belonged to the Popular party, and used the Journal to 
oppose the Government party. In 1 734. when the British 
governor, William Cosby, 
abixiptly dismissed Morris 
from his office, the Journal 
criticized Cosby severely. 

The British arrested 
Zenger, and tried him in 
■735 fo'' criminal libel. 
Zenger's lawyers were dis- 
barred, and he was left 
almost defenseless. Finally, 
Andrew Hamilton, a fa- 
mous Philadelphia lawyer 
came to New York to 
Zenger. Hamilton pre- 
sented a brilliant and pow- 
erful speech that persuaded 

the JLiiT to find Zenger "not gtiilty" by arguing that Zen- 
ger had printed the truth, and that tmth is not libelous. 

While being held for trial, Zenger could communicate 
only with his wife, and she had to speak to him through 
a keyhole. Nevertheless, she kept his paper going, miss- 
ing only one edition. After his acquittal, Zenger 
published A Brief Narrative of the Case and Tryal of 
John Peter ^enger (1736). 

Zenger was born in Germany, and came to New York 
at the age of 13. He was apprenticed to a printer, and 
set up his own printing shop in 1726. The Zenger 
Memorial Hall in Federal Hall, New York City, was 

dedicated in 1953. Kenneth N. Stewart 

See also Freedom of the Press (picture). 

ZENITH, ^E nith, is a term in astronomy that refers 
to the point in the heavens directly overhead. The zenith 
is opposite to the nadir, or the point directly below. A 
straight line could be drawn connecting the zenith, the 
center of the earth, and the nadir. 

The zenith provides a means for making certain cal- 
culations in astronomy and geography. For example, the 
location of a star can be computed by determining the 
distance between the zenith and the star, .\stronomers 
call this distance the zenith distance. Oliver j. Lee 

See also N.\dir. 

ZENO, an Eastern Roman Emperor. See Odoacer. 




John Peter Zenger 



495 



ZENO 

ZENO, ^EE no (c. 335-265 e.g.), was the founder of 
Stoic philosophy at Athens. He was born at Citium on 
the island of Cyprus. It is reported that he was originally 
a merchant, but was shipwrecked and lost all his prop- 
erty traveling to Athens in 314 B.C. He stayed there, 
and took up the study of philosophy, meeting his 
students on a painted porch or stoa, from which the 
name stoic came (see Stoic). 

Zeno taught that it is foolish to try to shape circum- 
stances to our desires. The world process is not like a 
blindly running machine. Instead, a divine intelligence 
guides and governs it, and directs all things ultimately 
toward what is good. The wise man will "follow nature" 
and fit his desires to the pattern of events. He will find 
happiness in freedom from desire, from fear of evil, and 
in knowing that he is in tune with the divine purpose 
directing all things. Thf Stoic philosophy spread to 
Rome and flourished there for several centuries after the 

birth of Clhrist. Lewis M. Hammond 

ZENO OF ELEA (490?-430 b.c.) was a follower of 
Parmenides (see Parmenides). Parmenides asserted that 
the one unchanging Being was the ultimate reality. 
Zeno, in his Paradoxes, tried to prove the absurdity of 
believing that reality is made up of many changing 
things. He argued that if a thing moves, it must move 
either where it is or where it is not. But it cannot move 
where it is, because there it is at rest. Nor can it move 
where it is not, because it does not even exist there. So, 
he concluded, motion is absurd. Lewis m. Hammond 

ZENOBIA, zee XOH bih it/i, called "The Queen of the 
East," was the ruler of the ancient Syrian desert city of 
Palmyra. 

The daughter of an Arab chieftain, Zenobia became 
the wife of Odenathus, King- of Palmyra. When he 
died, in about a.d. 266, she became sole ruler. Her 
husband had been loyal to Rome, but Zenobia wanted 
to carve an empire out of the Roman possessions in the 
East. Her adviser, Cassius Longinus, encouraged her, 
and her armies occupied Egypt and other Roman 
territories. 

Emperor Aurelian sent an army to stop her in a.d. 
271 . She was captured and brought to Rome. Zenobia's 
beauty and dignity so impressed the emperor that he 
freed her and gave her an estate near Tivoli. Her daugh- 
ters married prominent Romans. E. A. speiser 

ZEOLITE, ^EE oh lyl, is the name for a group of 
minerals that are silicates of aluminum, sodium, and 
calcium. Some of them also contain potassium. Scien- 
tists class them as hydrous, because they contain up to 
20 per cent water. They give off the water easily when 
heated. The name zeolite comes from a Greek word 
meaning boiling stone. Zeolites occur in cracks and 
cavities of rocks such as basalt, diabase, gabbro, and 
granite. 

The most practical use of zeolite is as a water softener. 
Zeolites give up sodium ions and absorb almost all of 
the ions of minerals that cause hardness in water. Chem- 
ical manufacturing plants and laboratories produce 
artificial compounds of zeolite. Ceurgf, l. bush 

See also Water Softening. 

ZEPHANIAH, ZEF uh NT uh, was an ancient Hebrew 
prophet. He probably lived during the reign of Josiah, 
who ruled in Judah from 638 to 608 B.C. His name has 



been given to a book of the Old Testament. This book 
has only three chapters. The first two were written by 
Zephaniah. He prophesied that Judah and several 
other nations were doomed because their people had 
done evil. The end of the book tells of the happy state 
of those who have been purified by God and reunited 
with Him. The book is famous for its description of the 

coming "Day of the Lord." Walter G. Williams 

ZEPHYR, ^EF ur, is any warm, gentle western breeze. 
Zephyrs occur most often in the Temperate Zone during 
summer. The name comes from the Greek ^o/i/ioj-, mean- 
ing dark side, or west. 

ZEPPELIN, ZEP uh lin, or tsep uh LEEN, FERDI- 
NAND VON ( 1 838- 1 9 1 7), was a famous German pioneer 
in lighter-than-air vehicles. He designed aircraft that 
were primarily gas bags, supported internally by a light 
framework. Engines powered and controlled his aircraft. 
These aircraft soon were named after him. Germany 
used Zeppelins in air raids against Great Britain during 
World War I. These were the first planned air raids 
against a civilian population in histoiy (see Airship). 

Zeppelin was born at Constance, Baden, and was 
trained to be an army officer. He visited the United 
States during the Civil War and went up in balloons 
with the Union forces. The balloons convinced him of 
the usefulness of aircraft. Zeppelin served in the 
Franco-Prussian War in 1870. After he retired from 
the army in 1891, he devoted himself to aeronautics. He 
had spent most of his savings when Kaiser Wilhelm II 
became interested in his work and offered some financial 
support. Zeppelin lived long enough to see England stop 
the zeppelin threat and Germany abandon a zeppelin 
construction program. Robert b. Hotz 

ZERNIKE, ZUR nuh keh, FRITS (1888- ), a Dutch 
physicist, received the 1953 Nobel prize in physics for 
developing the method of phase contrast and a micro- 
scope based on this method. The microscope allows the 
viewer to see colorless and transparent objects such as 
cells and bacteria without staining, and thereby killing, 
them. The same technique has been used to make pre- 
cise measurements of the flatness or regularity of tech- 
nical devices, such as mirrors and lenses. Zernike was 
born in Amsterdam. 

ZERO, a Japanese plane. See Air Force (picture). 

ZERO, in arithmetic, is the name of the digit, 0. It 
is used to indicate the absence of quantity. A zero is 
needed in a positional numeral system, such as the 
familiar system commonly used by most peoples today. 
In a positional system, the position, or place, of a digit 
determines the digit's value. Thus, in the numeral 246, 
the digit 2 stands for two hundred, the digit 4 stands 
for four tens (or forty), and the digit 6 stands for si.\ 
units, or ones. The numeral represents the number two 
hundred forty-si.x. In order to write the number two 
hundred six, a symbol is needed to show that there are 
no tens. The digit serves this purpose, and the number 
is written 206. Zero added to or subtracted from any 
number gives the original number. A number multiplied 
by zero gives zero. Division by zero is undefinable. 

On most scales, zero marks the starting point or the 
neutral position. For example, zero on an ammeter 
means no current is flowing through the instrument. 
Positive numbers are usually placed to the right or 
above zero, and negative numbers to the left or below 
zero. On some scales, the zero point is fixed arbitrarily. 



For example, on a ceiuigrade thermometer, zero is set 
at the temperature at which water freezes. 

Scholars do not know when the zero was invented. 
It was used before the .\.D. 800"s, and may have been 
invented as early as the lOO's B.C. Ihe Hindus probably 
originated it. The word zero probably came from ziphi- 
rum, a Latinized form of the Arabic word sifr. Sifr is a 
translation of the Hindu word suuya, meaning void or 

empty. Howard VV. Eves 

Sec also Decim.\l Number System; Digit. 

ZERO, ABSOLUTE. See Absolute Zero. 

ZERO READER FLIGHT DIRECTOR. See Aircraft 
Instruments. 

ZEUS. See Jupiter (in mythology). 

ZEUS, STATUE OF. See Seven Wonders of the 
W'ori^d (Ancient Wonders; picture. The Statue of Zeus). 

ZHUKOV, ZHOO kawf, GEORGI KONSTANTINO- 
VICH (1895- ), is a Russian marshal. This is the 
highest rank in the Russian army. When Germany in- 
vaded Russia in 1941, Zhukov was chief of staff of the 
Red army. He organized the defense of Moscow late in 
1941 and the Stalingrad victory of 1942 and 1943. Made 
a marshal in January, 1943, he led Russian armies 
into GeiTnany. He commanded the forces that stoiTned 
and captured Berlin. On May 9, 1945, with other 
Allied officials, Zhukov received the Nazi surrender 
from German Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel. 

Joseph Stalin feared Zhukov's popularity. In 1946, 
Stalin demoted Zhukov to a command in Odessa on 
the Black Sea, and, later, to a still smaller post in the 
Ural Mountains. But, after Stalin's death in 1953, 
Zhukov became a deputy minister of defense. When 
Nikolai Bulganin became premier in 1955, Zhukov was 
named minister of defense. 

In June, 1957, Zhukov helped Nikita .S. Khmshchev 
in his fight for power against Georgi Malenkov and 
others. For this aid, Khrushchev raised Zhukov to full 
membership in the party's 

Presidium. But Khmshchev, Georgi Zhukov 

like Stalin earlier, was jeal- 
ous of Zhukov's influence. 
In October, 1957, while 
Zhukov was away visiting 
Yugoslavia and Albania, 
Khrushchev ousted him 
from the defense ministry 
and from the party's Pre- 
sidium and Central Com- 
mittee. 

Zhukov was born at 
Strelkovka, in central Rus- 
sia, the son of a peasant 
farmer. During World War 
I, he was a private in the 
Russian army. Zhukov joined the Communist party 

in 1919. .\LBF.RT P.ARRY 

ZIEGFELD, Z^Gfeld, FLORENZ (1869-1932), was an 
American theatrical producer. He became famous for 
musical spectacles which featured beautiful women, 
scenery, and costumes, and soinetimes excellent come- 
dians. He was born in Chicago, son of the founder of the 
Chicago Musical College. In 1907 Ziegfeld produced 
the first of his annual ^iegfeld Follies. He also produced 
musical comedies, the most notable of which was Show 

Boat in 1927. Barnard Hewitt 




ZINC 

ZIEGLER, KARL (1898- ), is a German organic 
chemist. He shared the 1963 Nobel prize in chemisti-y 
with Giulio Natta, an Italian physical chemist. Zieglcr 
found ways to combine metals such as aluminum with 
organic compounds such as ethylene. Such combina- 
tions are called organometaliic compounds. This en- 
abled industry to produce such important substances as 
polyethylene (a plastic) and butadiene (a substance used 
to make synthetic rubber). In the Ziegler process the 
organometaliic compounds act as catalysts (agents stimu- 
lating chemical changes). 

Ziegler was born at Helsa, Germany. He studied at 
the University of Marburg. He became director of the 
Kaiser Wilhelm Institute (now the Max Planck Insti- 
tute) for C'oal Research at Miilheim in 1943. AaronJ.Iudk 

ZIGGURAT. See Architecture (Beginnings; pic- 
ture). 

ZIMBALIST, EFREM (1889- ), is a well-known vio- 
linist. He made his debut in Berlin in 1907, and his first 
appearance in the United States in 1911. Later he be- 
came a United States citizen. In 1941 he was appointed 
director of the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia. 
Zimbalist was born in Rostov, Russia, and studied 

with Leopold Auer. Dorothy DeL^y 

ZINC, zi'ik (chemical symbol, Zn), is a bluish-white 
metallic element. Its atomic weight is 65.37 and its 
atomic nuinber is 30. Andreas Marggraf, a German 
scientist, discovered zinc in 1 746. Zinc resembles lead, 
but it is much harder. When heated to a temperature 
of from 212° to 300°F., zinc softens and becomes 
malleable and ductile. It can be pounded into thin 
sheets or drawn into fine wires. Moist air forms a self- 
protective coating of tarnish on zinc. But because zinc 
docs not Rist, it is often used as a protective coating. 

Uses. Manufacturers use large amoimts of zinc to 
galvanize (coat) iron and steel to make them rustproof. 
One of the oldest and simplest methods of galvanizing 
consists of first cleaning the surface to be galvanized, 
then dipping it in melted zinc. Electroplating and cer- 
tain other technical methods are also used in galvaniz- 
ing. Because spelter (sheet zinc) resists rust, it is used for 
roofs and gutters, tank linings, and many other articles. 
Zinc is also used in making electric dry cells and 
zinc die castings, and in powder metallurgy. The metal 
is readily alloyed with copper to form brass, with copper 
and tin to form bronze, and with copper and nickel to 
form German silver. It is also used in zinc etching, for 
making printing plates for reproducing drawings. 

^inc white, or zinc oxide, a compound of zinc and 
oxygen, is a white powder. It is widely used to make 
white paint. This oxide is also used as a filler for rubber 
goods, and in the preparation of cosmetics, dental ce- 
ments, and many other articles, ^inc sulfate, or white 
vitriol, occurs in white crystals that change to powder 
when exposed to the air. It and zinc oxide are used in 
calico printing and in medicine, ^inc chloride, a com- 
pound of zinc and chlorine, is a wood preservative. 

Mining Zinc. Zinc is never found in a pure state, but 
its ores arc foimd in most parts of the world. The main 
ore mineral of zinc issphalerite, or zinc blende, a compound 
of zinc with sulfur. A less important ore is smithsonite, a 
compound of zinc, carbon, and o.xygen. Others include 
calamine, willemite, zmcite, a^nd ] tank Unite. 



497 



LEADING ZINC MINING STATES AND PROVINCES 

Tons of zinc mined each year 
British Columbia 000000000000^ 



200,400 Ions 

Tennessee 

83,700 Ions 

Quebec 

54,900 Ions 

New York 

54,600 Ions 

Idaho 

53,400 Ions 

Ontario 

51,100 Ions 

Colorado 

33,200 Ions 

Saskatchewan 

36,900 Ions 

Utah 

35,600 Ions 
Manitoba 



gggggc 
oooc 

•■•■••• 

gggc 

gggc 
ggc 

ooc 



34,500 tons 

Based on o 4-year average of governmenl slalislics. 



LEADING 


ZINC MINING COUNTRIES 


Tons of 


zinc mined each year 


United States 




oggggggggggg 


457,700 Ions 






Canada 




QQOQQggggggc: 


437,000 tons 






Russia 




ogggggggggc 


408,000 tons 






Australia 




ggggggggc 


317,200 Ions 






Mexico 




QQoggggc 


288,300 tons 






Peru 




QQQPS. 


182,300 Ions 






Japan 




ogggc 


181,800 Ions 






Poland 




gggg 


1 53,800 tons 






Italy 




Qogc 


145,800 Ions 






Congo (Leopoldvil 


le) 


ggc 


103,200 Ions 






Based on a 4 


-year average of government statistics. 



1 



Deposits of zinc ore are found in dolomite and lime- 
stone rock. They may be contained in deep or shallow 
lodes and veins. The chief mines producing zinc ore 
are in the United .States, Canada, Russia, Australia, 
Mexico, and Peru. The chief U.S. mines producing 
zinc ore are in the eastern states, the Mississippi Basin, 
and the Rocky Mountains. Harrison ashlf.v Schmitt 

See also Alloy; Ductihtv; Galvanized Iron and 
Steel; Malleability. 

ZINC CHLORIDE. See Chloride. 

ZINCITE. See Zinc. 

ZINNIA, ^/A" ih uh, is a genus of garden plants of 
the composite family. There are about 16 species. The 
zinnias are native to Mexico and the southwestern 
United States. The best-known zinnia is a garden plant 
that blooms in a wide variety of colors. It has a stiff, 
hairy stem which may grow 2 feet tall. The flowers are 
in tones of red, yellow, scarlet, crimson, pink, salmon, 
and bronze. Each floret is stifl' and grows at right angles 
to the head. Along with the marigolds, this zinnia is the 
most successful of summer annual flowers. It grows in 
three types. One is youth-and-old-age, which grows as 
high as 3 feet. Another has golden, starlike flowers. 
The third is a miniature hybrid. 

Zinnias grow well in ordinary garden soil in mild and 
warm climates. They are grown from seed, and need 
plenty of sun. Seeds shoiild be planted in April or May. 

Scientific Classification. Zinnias are in the composite 
family, Compositae. Youth-and-old-age is genus ^irmia, 
species -J^. elegans. The starlike Howcr is ,J. linearis; the 
small hybrid, ^. angustijolia. Alfred c. hottiss 

See also Flower (picture. Summer Garden Flowers). 

ZINZENDORF, COUNT VON. See Moravians. 

ZION is a word with many different meanings. It 
comes from the Hebrew word Tsiydn. Originally, it was 
the name of a hill in the city of Jerusalem. .After the 
Israelites captured the city from the Jebusites, Zion be- 



came the place where the royal palace of King David 
stood and where Solomon later built the Temple. It was 
the seat of Jewish worship and government. 

The name Zion is also used to refer to the Israelites 
themselves. .After their exile from the Holy Land, the 
word Zion meant to them their homeland, with Jerusa- 
lem, the Temple, and all Palestine's ancient glory. 
Among Christians, the name Zion means the church 
ruled by God, or a heavenly city or heavenly home. 

See also Zionism. 

ZION NATIONAL PARK lies in southwestern Utah. 
It has many colorful canyons, some of which are ex- 
tremely narrow and have steep, plunging walls. Rock 
formations range in color from dark red and orange to 
light purple and pink. These colors change continu- 
ously with the reflection of light. Wild animal and 
plant life flourish in the park. Mule deer and smaller 
animals live in the canyons, and a few bighorn, or 
mountain, sheep dwell on the high cliffs. 

Zion Canyon is the main feature of the park. The 
Virgin River has cut through the sandstone for many 
thousands of years and has made this one of the most 
beautifully colored canyons in the world. Zion Canyon 
is about 15 miles long and from half a mile to only a few 
feet wide. Its walls tower 2,000 to 3,000 feet, in some 
places almost straight up and down. The canyon con- 
tains many unusual rock formations such as the Great 
White Throne, a huge mass of stone rising nearly half 
a mile from the canyon floor. The colorful throne may 
reflect purple at one moment and pale yellow the next. 

The park covers nearly 150,000 acres (see Utah 
[color map]). It was set aside in 1909 as Mukuntuweap 
National Monument. In 1919, the park was enlarged 
and became Zion National Park. Zion National Monu- 
ment, 50,000 acres of loigged land adjoining the park, 
was added in 1956. Carlos s. vvhitino 

See also Nation.al Park (picture). 



ZIONISM is the name of the movement among Jews 
to set up a national Jewish state in their ancient land 
of Palestine. The word ^ion comes from the name of a 
hill in Jerusalem on which the royal palace of David 
stood. 

In early times, the Jews lived in an independent state 
in the area known as Palestine. But in 586 B.C., Baby- 
lonians captured Jerusalem and drove many Jews out of 
Palestine. 1 he second Jewish commonwealth flourished 
in Palestine till .a.d. 68. when the Romans destroyed it. 
After that, Palestine was ruled by many different in- 
vaders and the Jewish people scattered to all parts of the 
world. But Jews kept alive the hope of regaining politi- 
cal inde])endencc in the land of their forefathers. 

Modern Zionism was formally founded by Theodor 
Herzl of Vienna at an international congress held at 
Basel, Switzerland, in 1897. Herzl tried to obtain a 
charter for a separate Jewish state in Palestine. Turkey 
ruled Palestine at that time and refused to encourage the 
Jews. But Zionists did encourage many Jews to move to 
Palestine. The first new settlers came in 1881 from 
Russia and Romania, where they had been victims of 
the anti-Semitism that raged throughout eastern Europe 
in the late 1800's and early 1900"s. 

The British Mandate. In November, 1917, Great Brit- 
ain issued the Balfour Declaration, which supported the 
establishment of a national home for Jews in Palestine. 
In 1922, the League of Nations approved a British 
mandate over Palestine. The British government ap- 
pointed members of the Zionist movement to act as an 
advisory board. During the first 10 years after World 
War I, Jewish settlers fotuided many agricultural colo- 
nies and built up Tel Aviv and other cities. In 1925, 
they opened the Hebrew University in Jerusalem. He- 
brew becanre a living language throughout the land. 

Effects of World War II. Nazi persecution of European 
Jews before and during World War II stimulated the 
Zionist movement. Many Jews, driven from their homes 
or placed in concentration camps, looked upon a Jew- 
ish Palestine as their only possible refuge. By the end of 
the war, nearly 600,000 Je\vs lived in Palestine. Thou- 
sands tried to enter Palestine illegally. Both the British 
and Arabs opposed this movement. They stopped ships 
carrying illegal immigrants and put refugees in camps 
in Palestine and on the island of Cyprus. 

In 1945, Egypt, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Transjordan 
(now Jordan), Saudi Arabia, and Yemen founded the 
Arab League. Its immediate object was to oppose the 
founding of a Zionist state. In late 1947, the UN Gen- 
eral Assembly approved the partition of Palestine into 
separate Jewish and Arab states. The Arab countries 
protested bitterly. Great Britain gave up its mandate 
over Palestine in May, 1948. The Zionists immediately 
proclaimed the state of Israel. War broke out between 
the Arab League states and Israel. Fighting continued 
for about nine months, with Israel winning most of the 
battles. Meanwhile, a UN mediator worked with Arab 
and Jewish leaders to bring peace. In February, 1949, 
open warfare ceased, and a cold war of boycotts and 
border incidents began. ijonard c. mishkin 

Related Articles in World Book include: 
Arab League Israel 

Ben-Guiion, David Weizmann, Chaim 

Hadassah Wise, Stephen Samuel 

Herzl, Theodor 



ZITHER 

ZIPPER is a term often used to mean any kind of slide 
fastener. These fasteners have two edges of teeth and 
hollows which fit into each other very snugly. A slide 
draws the two edges together and meshes the teeth into 
the hollows. The edges remain fastened until they are 
released again by drawing the slide back over them, 
unmeshing the teeth. Slide fasteners are used to fasten 
clothing, luggage, brief cases, and similar articles. 

Whitcomb L. Judson of Chicago invented the first 
slide fastener in 1892. It was a series of hooks and eyes 
that fastened together with a slider. Judson's friend, 
Colonel Lewis Walker, obtained a patent on the 
meshed-tooth type of slide fastener in 1913. In 1924, 
the B. F. Goodrich Company gave the trade name Rip- 
per to rubber galoshes closed by meshed-tooth slide 

fasteners. William H. Dooley 

ZIRCON is a semi-precious stone that ranges from 
brown and gray to blue and green in color. A colorless 
variety is often used as a diamond substitute. The best 
examples of zircon have been found along the beaches 
and river beds of California, Florida, and North Caro- 
lina in the L^nited States, and in Madagascar, Norway, 
and Russia. Zircon is a December birthstone (see 
Birihsione). Zircon gems are large crystals of the 
mineral c'""", the main source of zirconium. 

ZIRCONIUM, zur h'OH ni urn (chemical symbol, Zr), 
in its pure state, is a white, soft, metallic element. Its 
atomic weight is 91.22, and its atomic nuirrber is 40. 
Martin Heinrich Klaproth, a German chemist, discov- 
ered it in 1789 while analyzing samples of zircon. 

Zirconium is found in nrost parts of the world, but 
in such small quantities that it is considered one of the 
rarest of metals. It is usually found along with silica in 
zircon and a few other minerals. Zircon has been pro- 
duced from beach sands on the east coast of Florida, 
from sands in North Carolina and Brazil, and is said to 
occur in commercial quantities in Australia and India. 

Zirconium is used in atomic reactors because it does 
not readily absorb neutrons. Fused zi't'oiiia. a compound 
of zirconitun and oxygen, can withstand extremely 
high temperatures. Zirconia is used in rocket engines 
and high-temperature fur- 
naces. H VRRISnN'.'\SIILF.vSnHMlTT 

ZITHER is a stringed in- 
strument that has musical 
tones much like those of a 
harp, lute, or guitar. The 
zither has from 29 to 42 
strings, which the player 
plucks with the fingers of 
both hands. The strings are 
stretched over a thin, flat 
box rounded at one end. 
The zither probably devel- 
oped from an ancient Greek 
lutelike instrument called 
a cilhara. The instrument is 
particularly popular in cen- 
tral European countries. 
However, the zither was 
quite widely played in the 
United .States during the 

late 1 800's. Charles B. RioHTEK 

499 



The Zither is one of the 

oldesf musicol instruments. The 
Greeks used it about A.D. 24. 




ZOAR VILLAGE 

ZOAR VILLAGE. See Ohio fPlaces to Visit). 

ZdCALO. .See Mexico City (Famous Landmarks). 

ZODIAC, ^OH dee ack. is the name of an imag- 
inary belt in whicli the moon and planets travel. The 
belt extends 8° on each side of the ecliptic (the sun's ap- 
parent path aroimd the earth). From the earliest times, 
men have divided the zodiac into 12 equal pans of 30° 
each. These parts are called the signs of the zodiac. Abwut 
2,000 years ago, each sign received the name of the 
constellation that occupied its position. But. since that 
lime, the signs have slipped westward about one full 
division, because the position of the earth's a.xis has 
changed. Today, the stars of Aries are in the sign of 
Taurus. Those of Taurus are in the sign of Gemini, 
those of Gemini in the sign of Cancer, and so on. 

Originally, all the constellations in the zodiac took 
their names from animals. For the Greeks, the stars of 
Libra, the balance, represented the claws of Scorpius, 
the scorpion. Later, the claws came to represent the 
scales, or the beam balance. Today, the signs of the 
zodiac have a meaning only for astrologers, i. M. Levitt 

See the separate articles on the constellations named 
for the signs of the zodiac, such as Aquarius; Gemini. 

See also Astrology; House (in astrology). 

ZODIACAL LIGHT, zoh DI uh kul. is a cone-shaped 
glow of faint light which is seen in the Northern Hemi- 
sphere. It appears soon after twilight on spring evenings, 
and just before dawn in the autumn. It extends upward 
and southward from the position of the sun. In the 



tropics the zodiacal light can be seen both evening and 
morning throughout the )'ear. The light is brightest near 
the sun and shades off gradually. It can easily be traced 
halfway across the sky. Some obsei"vers have said they 
can trace it completely around the sky. They say they 
notice a brighter area just opposite the sun, called the 
Gegensehein, which means counterglow. 

The zodiacal light is so named because it is seen 
against the zodiacal constellations which lie along the 
ecliptic (the sun's apparent path around the earth). The 
accepted explanation of the light is that large numbers 
of small particles of material scattered about the inside 
of the earth's orbit reflect sunlight and become visible 
when the earth is dark. Ouver j. Lee 

ZOETROPE. See Motion Picture (Early Develop- 
ments). 

ZOG I, zohg. or ZOGU I (1895-1961), ruled .\lbania 
from 1925 until 1939. He served as a minister in various 
Albanian cabinets fonned after World War I (see 
.'Xlbania [History]). In 1924 he was forced to flee to 
Yugoslavia. Six months later, with Yugoslav help, he 
returned at the head of an army. He made himself 
president in 1925 and king in 1928. 

Zog found it necessary to rely on the Italians for 
financial help. The Italians came to dominate the coun- 
try, and in 1939 they invaded Albania and absorbed 
it. Zog went into exile. He did not return because com- 
mtmist guerrillas gained control of .-\lbania during 
World War II and proclaimed it a republic. Zog was 
born at Bugajet, Albania. He was educated in Con- 
stantinople (now Istanbul). R. v. Burks 



The 1 2 Signs of the Zodiac 

are the basis for a type of 
fortunetelling called astrol- 
ogy. The astrologer determines 
the signs in which the sun, 
moon, and planets stood at the 
time of a person's birth. These 
signs and their relationships 
ore supposed to predict a 
person's character and future 
fortune. The dates on which 
the sun enters the signs of the 
zodiac vary somewhat. 




500 



ZOLA, ~0H luh, EMILE (1840-1902), enjoyed great 
fame in his lifetime as a novelist. He was also one of 
the most conspicuous figures in French history during 
the trials of Captain Alfred Dreyfus (see Drevfus, 
Alfred). He is still considered one of the greatest 
pAiropean fiction writers. His influence on the natural- 
istic novel has been deep and lasting (see Novel [On 
the Continent]). 

Zola was born in Paris. After a few years of poverty, 
he achieved success with Therese Raquin in 1867, He 
then started a 20-volume series, Les Roiigon-M ac quart, 
that follows the heroic, but often sordid, adventures 
of a French family during the 1800"s. Some of the best 
known of these novels are VAssominoir (The Dram 
Shop) (1877), a tale of alcoholism; Nana (1880), the 
story of an unscrupulous Parisian social-climber; and 
Germinal (1885), a portrayal of the life of miners in 
northern France. 

Zola was primarily a powerful creator of character 
and plot, and is noted for 
the range and vigor of his 
stories. He wished to ban- 
ish personal expression from 
literature, and to reflect 
only positive truth in its 
uglier aspects. His portrayal 
of the society of his time 
stresses all that is low and 
brutal in men. Zola thought 
he was holding a faithful 
mirror to his age, but he 
erred in omitting the im- 
pulses that drive men to 
transcend themselves 
through passion, heroism, 
and devotion to other men. 

Like many writers of his time, Zola was fascinated 
by science. He admired the philosopher Hippolyte 
Taine, who tried to explain genius through heredity and 
environment. Zola even contended, in The Experimental 
Novel (1880), that a novelist can "experiment" upon 
social groups and individuals to discover their ills. 

Zola stressed the misery and fears of industrial 
workers, and his novels did much to improve evil work- 
ing conditions. With great courage, he intervened in 
the Dreyfus affair with a thundering manifesto. J' Accuse 
(I Accuse) (1898). Zola was condemned for libel and fled 
to England. But the manifesto's accusations caused such 
an uproar that Dreyfus was given a new trial and his 
name was finally cleared. Zola became a national hero 
for his part in the affair. Henri peyre 

ZOLLVEREIN, TSAWL fur INE, is the German word 
for customs union. It was the name of the commercial 
union, or trading arrangement, which Prussia and all 
the other states of Germany except Austria set up in the 
1800's. The ZoUverein prepared the way for the uni- 
fication of Germany in 1871. 

At the close of the Napoleonic Wars, Germany was 
made up of 38 separate states. Each state gloried in its 
own independence. Each had its own tariff' system, and 
charged customs duties on all trade. Trade was thus 
very difficult. In 1818, the Prussian Government abol- 
ished its internal tariffs and invited the other German 
states to join Prussia in eliminating their tariffs against 
each other. The German states were attracted by the 




Emile Zola 



ZONTA INTERNATIONAL 

advantages of free trade, and one by one they entered 
the ZoUverein. By 1866 only Austria, which had not 
been allowed to join, and a few other states had not be- 
come members. 

When the German Empire was established in 1871, 
the Imperial Customs Union replaced the ZoUverein. 
This union included all the German states except the 
free ports of Bremen and Hamburg. Bremen and most of 
Hamburg became members of the Imperial Customs 
Union in 1888 (see Customs Union). Harold j. heck 

ZOMBA, ~AHM huh (pop. 9,000; alt. 2,680 ft.), is 
the capital of Malawi, formerly the protectorate of 
Nyasaland, in eastern Africa. It lies about 70 miles 
south of Lake Nyasa. For location, see Malawi (map). 
Zomba is the center of a tobacco- and cotton-raising 

region. Hibberd v. B. Kline, Jr. 

ZONE, zohn, is a section or division of the earth's sur- 
face, usually in the form of a band or strip. 

Climatic Zones are five geographic belts that encircle 
the earth. Each of these zones is bounded by a parallel 
of latitude. The Torrid ^one lies across the ec(uator, 
extending lyTl' north to the Tropic of Cancer and 
23°27' south to the Tropic of Capricorn. The northern 
and southern Temperate ^ones, each nearly 43° in width, 
lie between the tropics and the polar circles. The Frigid 
J^ones, each about 23^° in width, lie north of the Arctic 
Circle and south of the Antarctic Circle (see World 
[color map]). 

These five zones were first defined by the early 
Greeks, who thought climatic conditions remained 
constant along parallels of latitude. Modern scientists 
know this is not true. Today, climatic zones or regions 
are marked out by lines of equal temperature and rain- 
fall. The position of these lines is affected by latitude, 
altitude, and distance from the sea. See Climate (Why 
Climates Differ; Studying Climate; color map). 

Time Zones are slightly irregular north-south belts 
that extend froin pole to pole. The boundaries of these 
zones are based in general on meridians of longitude. 
Each zone is about 15° wide and represents an hour of 
time (see Standard Time). 

Other Zones. Cities are often divided into zones, 
commonly called commercial, residential, and indus- 
trial (see Crrv Planning [Zoning]). Postal zones help 
speed the delivery of mail in large cities and determine 

parcel post charges. Samuel N. Dicken 

See also Antarctic Circle; Arctic Circle. 

ZONE, POSTAL. See Parcel Post (Parcel Post 
Rates): Post Office (Your Letter Goes on Its Way). 

ZONING. See City Planning; Housing (Zoning 
Laws). 

ZONTA INTERNATIONAL is a service club of execu- 
tive business and professional women. The organization 
has about 15,000 members in 425 clubs in the L'nited 
States and 15 other countries. Zonta International 
works to promote civic and social welfare, with special 
emphasis on the advancement of girls and women. It 
also works for the advancement of understanding, good 
will, and peace. Amelia Earhart graduate scholarships 
in aeronautics are given annually to women engineers. 
Zonta International was founded in 1919. It publislies 
a magazine. The ^ontian. Headquarters are at 59 E. 
Van Buren .St., Chicago, 111. 60605. elsbeth s. strathern 



501 





zoo is a collection of different kinds of living 
animals. A large zoo has birds, snakes, mammals, and 
other kinds of animals from all parts of the world. 
Most zoo animals live in cages. Others live in open 
areas that look like their natural surroundings. 

People of all ages have fun at the zoo. Large crowds 
laugh at the playful, chattering monkeys. They watch 
hungry tigers and lions gnaw chunks of raw meat at 
feeding time. The visitors admire the peacock as it 
spreads its tail feathers into a beautiful fan. And almost 
everyone enjoys tossing peanuts to the elephants and 
the bears, when feeding the animals is permitted. 

Zoos do more than just exhibit animals. They also 
serve as living laboratories for zoologists (scientists who 
study animals). Zoologists learn much about the habits 
of animals by studying them at zoos. 

Many zoos have beautiful gardens, large trees, and 
wide paths leading from one animal display to another. 
The word zoo is a short form of zoological garden. 



Wiile World 

Exciting Animal Exhibits at zoos attract people of all ages. 
A huge plastic whale welcomes the crowds that visit the children's 
zoo in Central Park in New York City. 



A Proud Mother Gorilla shows off her son at the zoo in Basel, 
Switzerland. Gorillas like to entertain people and rank among 
the most popular animals at many zoos. 

Paul stc 




502 




Zoo Animals often live in natural surroundings instead of indoor 
cages. Lions roam freely over a large, terraced area, separated 
from 200 visitors by a wide water-filled moat. Bears sun ttiem- 



selves on rocks that are much like those of their native mountains. 
But lion cubs stay caged with their mother until they grow large 
enough to get along by themselves. 



How Zoo Animals Live. Some persons feel sony 
for zoo animals because they think the animals are un- 
happy in captivity. They might think a leopard paces 
back and forth because it wishes to be free. But zool- 
ogists say that animals live longer and more happily 
in zoos than in the wilds. These experts say that the 
leopard paces by habit, and probably prefers its zoo 
home to the dangers of the jungle. Many zoo animals 
know no other life because they were born in captivity. 
They would feel frightened outside their zoo homes. 

Where They Live. Many zoo animals must be kept in 
cages. Most of the cages have bars or wire. But some 
cages are made of glass. Snakes are kept in glass cages 
because they could escape through bars. Monkeys are 
often kept behind glass because they tend to catch 
certain diseases from people. 

Some zoo animals are kept in areas surrounded by 
moats (ditches). Each moat is built for a certain kind of 
animal. For example, apes cannot swim, so they are put 
behind a wide moat filled with water. The lion can 
leap great distances, so its moat is much too wide to 
jump across. Some moats slope up\vard steeply, making 
it even harder for an animal to escape. 

Behind the moats, animals live in true-to-life settings. 
Mountain goats climb on slopes that are copies of their 
original homes in the Rocky Mountains. Lions stalk 
about on flat, grassy areas, or on rocky ledges. Bears 
prowl in and out of caves. Beavers build dams and 
homes in streams, and alligators crawl in swamps. 

]\'hat They Eat. Each zoo animal eats food that is 
carefully planned to meet its special needs. Experts 
prepare mixaires of minerals, vitamins, and basic 
foods to keep the animals healthy and content. The 
chief foods that make up meals for zoo animals include 
eggs, fish, fruits, grains, horsemeat, and vegetables. 

Not all zoo animals eat foods they might be expected 
to like. Some gorillas refuse to eat bananas. They 
prefer ground-up grains, milk, and yeast. .Some ant- 
eaters do not like ants. They would rather have a liquid 
food mixture that includes milk, eggs, meat, vitamins, 
and minerals. Many animals eat ''cakes" made of 
grains, flour, vegetables, salt, yeast, and milk. One such 
cake may weigh 25 pounds. 

Signs on some cages warn visitors not to feed the 
animals. Certain foods can make an animal sick. 



Thoughtless visitors throw such things as candy 
wrappers and tinfoil to the animals. If an animal swal- 
lows these, it may become sick and even die. But 
most zoo animals know what not to eat, and they rarely 
eat too much. Bears, for example, will not make them- 
selves sick by eating too many peanuts. 

When animals get sick, the zoo veterinarian (animal 
doctor) takes care of them. Most zoos have their own 
hospitals where sick animals may be treated. Some zoos 
operate special nurseries for newborn animals. 



Zoo Nurseries save many lives among animals born in captivity. 
In the nursery at Chicago's Lincoln Park Zoo, a zoology student 
gives a bottle feeding to an orphan tiger cub. 




zoo 

How Zoos Get Animals. Zoos obtain most of their 
animals from businessmen called animal dralirs. The 
animal dealer buys the animals from hunters or from 
other zoos. He sends a list of his animals to diflTer- 
ent zoos. If a zoo wants any of the animals, it buys 
them from the dealer. Zoos pay about S3. 500 for an 
Asian elephant, and up to S4,000 for a girall'e. 

.\ zoo pays especially high prices for animals that 
are in danger of becoming extinct (dying out). The 
European bison, for example, now lives only in zoos. 
Animals that are difficult to capture, or thai are hard 
to raise in captivity, also cost a great deal of money. 
The London Zoo once paid $28,000 for a panda. 

Zoos also trade animals with other zoos. The Bronx 
Zoo in New York City once made a trade with the 
Taronga Zoological Park in Sydney, .\ustralia. The 
Bronx Zoo received a kangaroo and a dingo (wild dog of 
Australia) in exchange for some squirrels and skunks. 

When an animal arrives at the zoo. it is quarantined 
(kept away from the others). Zoo officials do not put 
it near any other animals until the veterinarian has 
made sure it has no disease. 

History. The earliest known zoo belonged to Queen 
Hatshepsut of Egypt about 1500 B.C. Some early Chi- 
nese rulers also are believed to have kept collections of 
animals. Today's zoos developed from small exhibits 
of animals called menageries. Most menageries con- 
sisted of a few bears, lions, or tigers. The animals in 
menageries were usually kept in small, smelly, gloomy 
cages. Many persons became disgusted at this treat- 
ment of animals and refused to visit menageries. 

Modern zoos — those that do scientific research as 
well as show animals — developed about 150 years ago. 
The Jardin des Plantes in Paris was one of the first. 
The London Zoo opened in 1829, and the Moscow 
Garden in 1864. 

The first zoo in the United States was founded in 
Philadelphia in 1859. In 1890, Congress established 



Pleasant Retreats ore provided by zoos for people who live 
in crowded cities. Tree-lined pathways of the famous Vincennes 
Zoo wind through 35 acres on the outskirts of Paris, France. 




Capturing Zoo Animals is easy with the aid of a harmless 
drug that causes sleepiness. A rhinoceros captured in Zululand 
waits quietly before entering a strong crate, obove, for ship- 
ment to a zoo in the United States. The animal also stands calmly 
while the hunter takes its measurements, below. 



nn Tourist Corp. 




the National Zoological Park in Washington, D.C. 
(see N.^TioN.xL Zoologicm, P.\rk). In the late I800"s, 
Karl Hagenbeck of Germany became known for im- 
porting great numbers of animals from throughoiU the 
world. His Tiergarten in .Stellingen. Ciermany, was the 
first zoo to display animals in their natural surroundings. 

See H.AGF,NBECK, K.ARL. 

The largest zoo in the world is the 650-acre Whip- 
snade Zoo near London, England. A zoo that was 
started in New Delhi, India, in the late 1950's also 
ranks among the world's biggest. .\. B. LaGasse. Jr. 

Critically rcvioiveii t.y R. Marlin PERKINS 

.See also N.xture .Stiidv (picture. Visits to the Zoo). 
ZOOGEOGRAPHY. See Zoology (Branches). 



Okapia rmni Publi? 




ZOOLOGY, zo/i AHL oh jih, is the science or study 
of animal life, ibgelher with botany, the study of plant 
life, it forms the science of biology, the study of living 
things. .See Biology. 

Man him.sclf belongs to the animal kingdom, al- 
though his intellectual development sets him apart. 
Facts learned from the study of animals give man a 
better knowledge of himself. Man has gained much un- 
derstanding of the human body by studying animals 
that have organs and body ]jrocesscs similar to his own. 

Branches of Zoology 

Zoology is such a vast subject that most zoologists 
specialize in some part of the field. Many branches of 
the zoological science have been established. Some deal 
with special groups of animals. Eiiloiiio/oi;y. for example, 
deals with insects. Ornithology deals with birds. Other 
branches deal with special aspects of all the animal 
groups. Taxonomy is the science of naming and classify- 
ing animals. Morphology examines animal form and 
structure. Pathology deals with the nature of diseases. 
Pathologists can apply knowledge gained from animal 
diseases to the struggle to cure human ills. 

Comparative anatomy, which compares the body struc- 
tures of ditTerent animals, is closely related to evolu- 
tionary studies. Histology deals with the fine structures 
of the body tissues. Cytology studies the stmcture of in- 
dividual body cells. 

Genetics, the science of heredity, offers many inter- 
esting lines of research. Parents pass on a combination 
of their own characteristics to their offspring. Much in- 
formation about heredity has come from careful study 
of these combinations. .Still more knowledge has come 
from breeding experiments. These have led to valuable 
improvements in breeds of domestic animals, and have 
shed much light on human heredity. 

Embryology studies the development from an egg to a 
fully-formed young animal. Embiyologisls have ob- 
seived growth stages in a great variety of animals. 
Many embryologists are now ti-)ing to discover the com- 
plicated physical and chemical processes that underlie 
development. 

Physiology deals with bodily functions. Physiologists 
study such problems as how nerve fibers transmit im- 
pulses, how muscles contract, and how the body absorbs, 
circulates, and uses various food substances. Biochem- 
istry and biophysics study chemical and physical processes 
that can explain bodily functions. 

Psychology is the study of the mind. Our interest cen- 
ters mainly on man, but investigating animal psychol- 
og)' has helped us to understand the human mind and 
human behavior better. 

Ecology studies the environment in which animals 
live. Ecologists also study the factors that cause an 
animal to flourish in one type of surrounding and perish 
in another. Zoogeography is associated with ecology-. It 
deals with the distribution of animals in the various 
regions of the world. Zoogeographers tiy to answer such 
questions as: Why do polar bears live only near the 
North Pole, and penguins only near the .South Pole? 
Why do opossums live in the Western Hemisphere, but 
not in the Eastern Hemisphere? 

Paleontology, a biological field, borders on the sci- 
ence of geology. .It deals with animals of past ages. 
Vertebrate fossils (fossils that have backbones) have 



ZOOLOGY 

furnished much knowledge about the evolution of the 
higher animals. 

For more detailed information on branches of zool- 
ogy, see the separate articles listed at the end of this 
article. 

The Development of Zoology 

Eailiest man knew about and observed the animal 
life around him. Clave paintings by .Stone Age artists 
show close knowledge of animal subjects. Aristotle was 
the first tme scientist whose studies of animals have 
come down to us. He lived in Greece more than 300 
years before Christ was born. Aristotle wrote several 
works on animals. 1 hey show that he was a keen and 
accurate observer. Some of his accounts on animal de- 
velopment and structure stood unequaled for nearly 
2.000 years. Galen was a second great figure in ancient 
science. He practiced medicine in Rome in the a.d. 
lOO's. He also described many features of the structure 
of higher animals. After the decline of Rome, about the 
A.D. 400's, zoology and other sciences went into a de- 
cline that lasted a thousand years. See Aristotle ; Galen. 

Zoology and other scientific inquiiy enjoyed a re- 
birth in the 1500's. Andreas V'esalius of Belgium 
studied the slruclure of higher animals and man. He 
shocked people by finding errors in Galen's work. Swiss 
scientist Konrad Von Gesner made a detailed stud)' of 
the kinds of plants and animals found in Europe. 

During the 1600's and 1 700"s, knowledge of zoology 
expanded greatly. Explorations brought strange new 
animals to Europe from other continents. Tiny forms of 
life appeared under the microscope. .Scientists estab- 
lished the major fields of taxonomy and morphology 
during this period. 

Carolus Linnaeus, a Swedish naturalist , founded mod- 
ern taxonomy. So many animals were known by the 
I 700's that it created a need for a method of classifying 
them. Linnaeus devised a reasonable classification 
scheme. See Lin.naeus, Carolus; Classificatio.\. 

Baron Cuvier. a French naturalist, connected earlier 
studies of the structure of various animals with his own 
obsei-vations. He pointed out that almost all forms of 
animals belong to one or another of a few existing basic 
body [jatterns. Ciuvier's work stimulated further studies 
in animal structure, and led to the discovery of evidence 
for evolution. See Cuvier, Baron. 

.Scientists found close resemblances between many 
kinds of animals. Charles Darwin of Great Britain was 
the first to collect evolutionary evidence. This evidence 
indicated that blood relationships or common ancestors 
might accoimt for the resemblances. In his book The 
Origin of Species (1859), Darwin assembled observations 
and facts thai had accumulated for decades before him. 
I his data showed the reality of evolutionary processes, 
and explained how they operate. Many zoologists feel 
that Darwin's explanations of evolution are incomplete. 
But they accept almost universally the reality of evo- 
lution itself. See Darwin (Charles R.); Evolution. 

Careers In Zoology 

Each branch of the zoological sciences offers voca- 
tional opportunities. Zoologists may work in many 
fields, ranging from public health and animal hus- 



505 



"a world book science project comparing animal PARTS 



- jc- 



INTERNAL 
ORGANS 




COMPARATIVE 



AMATOMY 

ritix; 



INTERNAL 
ORGANe' 




WOKI.D BOOK photo 



The purpose of this project is to learn how the body structures of one atiimal 
compare with those of another animal. Zoologists use such comparisons as 
one means for determining how to group animals for scientific classification. 

MATERIALS 

You can buy all the materials needed for this project from a 
company that sells biological supplies. The animals come ready 
for dissection. In this project, a rot and a frog ore used. Other 
materials include two dozen small jars with lids, formalin, a box of 
straight pins, and several towels. A comparative anatomy text- 
book will help you identify the parts, and a biology laboratory 
manual will give additional information on how to remove the parts. 



Small tissue forceps Straight probe 

Scalpel and extra blade 

1 





Hooked probe 



Medium tissue forceps 



Instruments needed include a medium-sized scalpel with an 
extra blade, two dissecting probes (one with a hooked end), a 
medium-sized tissue forceps, and a small tissue forceps. Ordi- 
nary tweezers may be used for the small forceps. 



506 



Dissecting Pan, If you work on only one animal at d time, you will 
need only one dissecting pan. You can buy the pan or make it from 
a cake pan. To make the pan, melt equal amounts of beeswax and 
paraffin. Pour this mixture into the pan to a depth of about 14 inch. 




PREPARING THE SPECIMENS 




To Fasten the Animal. Be sure the wax in the dissecting pan 
is hord. Stretch the animal flat in the pan with its back down. 
Fasten it securely in place with straight pins. 



To Make the Incision. Hold the scalpel loosely and stroke the 
tip of the blade gently down the center of the exposed port of 
the animal. When the skin separates, put the scalpel aside. 





To Remove the Specimens, use the tissue forceps, probes, and 
your fingers. Separate the organs from the tissues that surround 
and hold these ports. Do not cut the tissues away unless you can- 
not remove them with the blunt instruments. 



To Identify the Parts. As you remove eoch specimen, identify 
it by comparing it with the textbook illustrations. Then place 
it in a jar with enough formalin to cover it, ond label the jar. 
Screw the lid tightly on the jar so the formalin will not evaporate. 




lllustiaioil I'j- Hill Kloinins r.n \\Or£r,D MOO 



507 



ZOOM LENS 

bandPi' to teaching and icsearch. A bachelor's degree is 
sufficient for some positions, but most require advanced 
training. Zoological management offers many opportu- 
nities, such as managing wildlife presei-ves. conducting 
expeditions, and supervising laboratories and museums. 
Museum work involves classifying animals, preparing 
exhibits, and preserving specimens. The federal govern- 
ment and many states offer special civil service posi- 
tions to trained zoologists. petbr gray 
Related Articles. Sec .Animal with its list of Related 
Articles. See also the following: 

Biographies 

Huxley (Thomas) 
Lankester, .Sir Edwin R. 
Mcdawar. Peter Brian 
Osborn (family) 
Swammerdam, Jan 

Animal Groups 

Amphibian Fish Ncmatoda 

Arachnid Flatwonn Protozoan 

Arthropod Insect Reptile 

Bird Invertebrate Rotifer 

Coelenterate Mammal Vertebrate 



Broom, Robert 
Cuvier, Baron 
Dana, James Dwight 
Ditmars, Raymond Lee 
Haeckel, F.rnst H. 



Crustacean 
Echinoderni 



Metazoan 
MoUusk 



Worm 



Morphology 

Ornithology 

Paleontology 

Pathology 

Physiology 

Protozoology 

Taxonomy 



Vivisection 
Zoo 



Branciils of Zoology 

Anatomy Entomology 

Biochemistry Evolution 

Bionics Genetics 

Biophysics Helminthology 

Cytology Hcrpctology 

Ecology Histology 

Embryology Ichthyology 

Unclassified 

Classitication Order 

Fauna Taxidermy 

ZOOM LENS. See Television (The Lenses). 

ZORACH, ZOHR ahk, WILLIAM (1887- ), be- 
came one of the leading American sculptors in the 
1930's. He exhibited at the \Vhitne\- Museum and the 
Museum of Modern Art. He designed the sculpture for 
the Post Office and Department of Justice buildings in 
Washington. Born near Kaunas, Lithuania, Zorach 
came to the United States as a child, and later studied 

painting and drawing. Charles Seymour, Jr. 

See also Sculpture (picture, An .\merican Sculptor). 

ZORN, Isohrn, ANDERS LEONHARD (1860-192U), 
was a Swedish painter and etcher. He became known 
for his portraits, landscapes, and nudes. His etchings 
are characterized by brilliant and fine line. His works 
include the painting. Summer in Sicederi, and the etch- 
ing, Portrait of Ertust Rcnan. He was born at Mora and 
studied in Stockholm. He traveled widely and lived 
in Paris from 1888 to 1896. s. \v. Hayter 

ZOROASTER, zoh roh AS ter, also called Z.\rathus- 
TRA, was an ancient Persian prophet who founded the 
Zoroastrian religion. His teachings became the guiding 
light of Persian civilization. Cyrus the Great and Darius 
the Great, the mighty rulers of Persia, spread his religion 
throughout their empire. After Alexander the Great 
conquered Persia, Zoroastrianism began to die out, but 
it revived during the early days of Christianity. Today 
the teachings of Zoroaster are the basis of the Parsi re- 
ligion in India (see Parsis). 



Little is known about Zoroaster. He is believed to 
have lived about 600 b.c. According to the ^end-Avesta, 
the sacred book of the Zoroastrian religion, he was born 
in Azerbaijan, in northern Persia. He was an unusual 
child, and at an early age, he began to have visions. 
Zoroaster is sujiposed to have spent his early manhood 
in the wilderness studying and working out the princi- 
ples of Zoroastrianism. At the age of 30 he started out to 
preach his new religion about a supreme being called 
Ahura Mazda, but no one would listen to him. About 
12 years later he converted King Vishtaspa, and the 
king spread the new religion by force. Zoroaster is be- 
lieved to have been killed at the age of 77 during an in- 
vasion of Persia by the Turanians. Cufton e. Olmstead 

■See also Tower of Silence; Zoro.\strians. 

ZOROASTRIANS, zoh rohAS trih uiuz.. are believers in 
the religion founded by Zoroaster, a Persian prophet, 
rhe Bible of the Zoroastrians is the ^end-Avata, or 
Avesla. The early parts (Gathas) contain Zoroaster's 
prayers to the one and only God, Ahura Mazda. He 
speaks "as friend to Friend." The God of the Gathas 
has six names. He is Good Thought, the Beauty of 
Holiness. Righteousness, Perfect Health, Dominion, 
and Immortality. Zoroaster taught that even the wicked _ 
are finally saved. The righteous ones go directly to para- ■ 
disc, the wicked are first purified in hell. Gathas teach ' 
that the greatest virtues are pure thoughts, good words, 
and righteous deeds. The greatest evil is the lie. 

The later poems and essays of the Avesta were prob- 
ably the work of priests or ancient singers. They be- 
lieved in Zoroaster's one god, but sang also to the 
forces of nature. The I 'endidad part of the Avesta gives 
the laws of the religion. It contains some of the best 
hygienic laws before the start of modern medicine. 

There are a number of small sects of Zoroastrians. 
One of these is a group of fire worshipers in Iran who 
are called Ghebers. Georce Noel Mavhew 

See also M.-vGi; Mithras; Parsis; Tower of Silence; 
Zoroaster. 

ZOUAVE, zoo AHV, is the name for soldiers of certain 
infanlr)- regiments in the French army. 'The name comes 
from that of the ^ouaoua tribe of Kabyles in Algeria, 
where the French first recruited Zouaves in 1830. At 
first, the Zouave regiments were battalions made up of 
tribesmen and Frenchmen. Later, the army separated 
the races, but the French Zouaves continued to wear 
iheir tribal dress. The Algerian regiments are called 
1 urcos. The Zouaves fought with distinction with Free 
French forces in North .Africa in World War II. 

Zouaves wear an unusual, bright-colored uniform. 
It has a short jacket, baggy red or blue trousers, leggings, 
and a tasseled cap or turban. Zouaves drill with a short, 
snappy step. 

Napoleon III organized a group called the Papal 
Zouaves in I8t)0 for the protection of the Papal States. 
They were disbanded in 1871 when Napoleon fell, after 
the siege of Paris. Tu.im vs e. griess 

ZSIGMONDY, ~///G mawn dee, RICHARD (1865- 
1929), an .Austrian chemist, studied the manufacture of 
colored glass which contained very finely divided gold 
particles. From this research, he developed the ultra- 
microscope and other pieces of apparatus which aided 
the study of colloid chemistry (see Ultramicroscope). 
He won the 1925 Nobel prize for chemistry. 

Zsigmondy was born in Vienna. He studied and 



508 



taught at Berlin and the Univereity of Graz in Austria. 
From 1897 to 1903, he carried on research on colloids in 
glass at Jena. He served as director of the Institute for 
Inorganic Chemistiy at the University of Gottingen 

from 1907 until his death. Henry M. Leicester 

ZUCCHINI. .Sec Plant (color picture, Vegetables Un- 
known to Our Forefathers). 

ZUGSPITZE is a mountain peak. See Germany (Lo- 
cation, .Size, and .Surface Features). 

ZUIDER ZEE, ^1' der ^A, was once a lake in the mid- 
dle of a large swampland in The Netherlands. It be- 
came an ocean gulf as a result of floods that occurred 
from the 1 lOO's to the 1300"s. This arm of the North 
Sea penetrated into the southern coast of The Nether- 
lands. 

In 1918, the Netherlands government passed a law 
providing for reclamation of this area. Builders began 
work on the project in 1923 by placing a dike between 
the Zuider Zee and the ocean. The project will be com- 
pleted about 1 980. The part of the Zuider Zee that re- 
mains is the fresh-water Lake IJssel. Robert o. reid 

See also Netherlands (Reclamation and Conserva- 
tion). 

ZULULAND, ^00 loo land, is the northeast part of 
Natal, one of the provinces of .South Africa. Zululand 
covers an area of 10,427 square miles. It lies along the 
Indian Ocean. .Swaziland lies to the north, and the 
lower Tugela River forms Zululand's southern bound- 
ary'. The land slopes up steeply from a low coastal plain 
to high mountains in the interior. Zululand is the home 
of the Zulus, who are considered among the bravest of 
the .African peoples. 



BI^^H SOUTH-WEST 
^B^B AFRICA 


BeCHUANALAND 
PROTECTORATE 




MO Za mbiq^^^^^H 




; y — J 

-■. y 




SWA^^^H^^^^H 


f^^^^-^' 






JATUNTir nrFAN^ 


SOUTH AFRICA 




^^^^^^^^^^^H| 



Zululand Lies Along the Indian Ocean, 

The Zululand population of about 544,000 includes 
only about 1 5.000 white people. The Zulus are Africans 
of Bantu origin. They are tall, well-built, and hand- 
some. They live in kraals (villages) made up of huts 
arranged in a circle. Fanning and cattle raising are the 
chief industries. .Since 1905, white men have owned 
vast sugar-cane plantations near the coast. Tliey also 
have introduced the raising of cotton to the people of 
Zululand. 

The British seized Zululand in 1887. Ten years later 
the territory became part of Natal, which was then a 
British colony. In 1906. the Zulus revolted. 1 he re- 
bellion was suppressed, but fighting flared again in 
1907. Peace followed this revolt, hibberd v. b. kline, jr. 

See also Bantu; Kaffir. 



ZURICH 

ZUNI INDIANS, ZOO nyee. Zuni is a Pueblo Indian 
village south of Gallup. N. Mex. The Indians who live 
there are called Z.'"''- B"-"- they call themselves Ashiwi 
(pronounced AH slue wee), which means the people. The 
Zuili once lived in seven pueblo villages, which the 
Spanish called "The .Seven Cities of Cibola" (see Ci- 
bola, .Seven Cities of). The Zuni gradually aban- 
doned all but one of these towns. 

Zuni pueblo originally stood as a terraced village 
around open squares. Now the Indians build individual 
one-story houses of purplish sandstone. The Zuni make 
handsome jewelry of siher combined with turquoise, 
shell, and jet. Zurii men are expert fire fighters. Each 
season they and other southwestern Indians are rushed 
to fight forest fires throughout the West. This has 
altered the ceremonial calendar, especially the dramatic 
dances they present during the summer. But the Indians 
still enact the colorful Shalako (pronounced shah LAH 
koh) ceremony late each fall. The public is pennitted 
to attend this ceremony. bertha p. dotton 

.See also Indian, American (picture, .\ Thunderbird 
Pin); Pi'i ELO Indians. 

ZUNZ, tsoonis, LEOPOLD (1 794-1886), has been called 
the founder of the scientific study of Judaism. In 1819, 
he helped found the Society for Jewish Culture and 
Knowledge, and from that time on published many 
works about the literature, ritual, and history of the 
Jews. He was the first scholar to make a scientific study 
of the prayers and poetry used in the sei-vices of the 
synagogue. Zunz also made thorough studies of other 
aspects of Judaism, including the intellectual life of 
European Jews. Leopold Zunz was born in Detmold, 
Germany, but he spent most of his life as a resident of 

Berlin. Clifton E. Olmstead 

ZUPPKE, ROBERT C. .See Football (Famous Foot- 
ball Plavcrs and Coaches). 

ZURICH, ZOOR ik (pop. 440.170; met. area 665,- 
000; alt. 1,867 ft.), is the largest city and the manufac- 
turing, commercial, and banking center of Switzer- 
land. For location, see .Switzerland (color map). This 
city at the north end of Lake Zurich has steep, narrow 



The Stately Grossmiinster Cathedral in Zurich, /eff, founded 
by Charlemagne in the 700's, towers above the Limmat River. 

Conzett &amp; Huber 




509 



ZUTPHEN, BATTLE OF 

streets and old-fashioned houses that contrast with its 
newer sections. The Limmat River divides Zurich into 
two parts called the Litllf City and the Great City. Eleven 
bridges cross tlie river to connect the two parts. 

Many famous buildings dot Zurich. The National 
Museum contains relics of the republic. The famous 
Swiss reformer, Huldreich Zwingli, once was pastor at 
the Romanesque cathedral built there in the lOOO's. 
Zurich, a noted center of learning, has the canton uni- 
versity, Switzerland's greatest institution of learning. 
It also has the Federal Institute of Technology and 
many other excellent schools. Zurich claims one of the 
world's finest botanical gardens. Frankun c. Erickson 

ZUTPHEN, BATTLE OF. .See Sidney, Sir Philip. 
ZUYDER ZEE. See Zuidkr Zee. 
ZWAANENDAEL MUSEUM. See Delaware (Inter- 
esting Places to Visit). 

ZWEIG, tsvyk, STEFAN (1881-1942), was a well- 
known Austrian writer of psychological novels, stories, 
biographies, and poems. 
His best-known novels in- 
clude Conflicts (1927), Amok 
(1931), and Beware oj Pity 
(1939). Some of his best 
I^Sl W^^ &lt;* biographies are Romain 

y*^ ' ■ Roitand (1921), Marie An- 

toinette (1932), and Erasmus 
of Rotterdam (1934). Zweig 
was born in Vienna. The 
Nazis forced him to leave 
Austria because of his Jew- 
ish ancestry, and from 1 934 
to 1940 he lived in Lon- 
don. He and his wife com- 
mitted suicide in Petropolis, Brazil, in 1942, because 
of de|)ression over world affairs. G. F. Merkfl 

ZWINGLI, rSVLXG lee, HULDREICH, or Ulrich 
(1484-1531), was a Swiss 
clergyman who led the Prot- 
estant Reformation in his 
country. He was one of the 
first persons to object to 
certain practices of the 
_ Roman Catholic Church 

mt and to demand reforms. 

H|u j^ ■■ Zwingli preached against 

^^^^^B^ ^^ fasting and the veneration 

^^^^^^B^H^ of saints, and insisted that 

^^^^^^H^^^^^^ ,~. should marry. But 

^^^^^^^^^^^^^■i^ he preached 

Brown Hios. agalnst the political power 
Huldreich Zwingli of the pope. 

Zwingli was born at 
Wildhaus, in the canton of St. Gallen. He studied 
at Basel and Bern, .Switzerland, and at the University 
of Vienna. He received a master of arts degree from 
Basel in 1502. From 1506 to 1516 he was a parish priest 
at Glarus. For a time he served as chaplain for Swiss 
troops in Italy, and participated in two or perhaps three 
campaigns. On his return to Glarus he began to protest 
against using .Swiss troops as paid professional soldiers 
in European wars. His writings made him unpopular, 
and he had to leave Glarus. 




Schaal, PIx 



Stefan Zweig 




In 1516 Zwingli settled at Einsiedeln and began to 
preach his ideas of reform. Three years later he was 
called to Zurich as "priest of the people." Here he be- 
gan to carry out the doctrines and ceremonies he 
favored. In 1520 he came to the support of the German 
reformer Martin Luther and openly opposed the pope. 
Most of .Switzerland sided with him, and in 1523 
Zurich broke with the Roman Catholic Church. In the 
following year, Zwingli married in order to conform 
with his belief in a married priesthood. 

Zwingli and Luther disagreed about several doctrines 
in the Reformation, especially that of the sacrament of 
the Lord's Supper, and the movement began to split up. 
In 1529 they held a conference at Marburg in a last 
attempt to patch up their differences, but they did not 
succeed. Zwingli's group broke away. 

In 1531 Zwingli's preachings led to a war between 
Zurich and the five Catholic cantons of Switzerland. 
Zwingli hoped to conquer the opposing cantons and 
unite them with his Protestant confederation, but his 
forces were defeated. He himself took part in the war as 
a chaplain with the troops, and was killed at the battle 
of Kappel. ' George L. Mosse 

See also Reformation. 

ZWORYKIN, Z^WIIR th kin, VLADIMIR KOSMA 

(1889- ), is a Russian-born American physicist and 
electronics engineer. He is responsible for many tech- 
nological advances in radio, television, and the electron 
microscope. 

He came to the United States in 1919. After learning 
to speak English, he went to work in 1920 for the radio 
tube department of the VVestinghouse Electric Com- 
pany in Pittsburgh, Pa. He studied at the University of 
Pittsburgh, where he received his Ph.D. degree in 1926. 

At Westinghouse, Zworykin w as put in charge of a 
group of young engineers to help develop the television 
camera and picture tube. His most important work 
there was the practical development of the iconoscope, 
an electronic tube that converts light ra)S into electric 
signals. The signals can 
then be changed into radio 
waves (see Iconoscope). 

Zworykin was also 
largely responsible for de- 
veloping and perfecting the 
electron microscope (see 
Electron Microscope). 
He became director of elec- 
tronics research for the 
Radio Corporation of 
America in 1929, and was 
made vice-president of the 
company in 1947. 

Zworykin was born in 
Murom, Russia, and was 

graduated from the Petrograd Institute of Technology 
in 1912 with a degree in electrical engineering. He then 
went to Paris, where he did X-ray research with the 
physicist Paul Langevin at the College of France. At 
the outbreak of World War I, Zworykin returned to 
Russia, and served for the next four years as a radio 
officer. After traveling around the world twice, he setded 
in the L'nited States. o. Gamow 

ZYGOTE. .See Fertilization. 

ZYMASE. .See Enzyme; Yeast. 




Vladimir Zworyliin 



510 



! ■ ' 



